So now that we spend quite a bit

of time diving into those crucial Dart and Flutter features,

it's time to dive deeper into Flutter.

And in this course section, we are going to explore

how we can add more interactivity to our Flutter apps,

how we can handle more than simple button clicks,

and also how we can theme our Flutter apps

to apply some global styling to our Flutter apps.

We'll explore how we can show modal overlays

and what exactly that is,

how we can present dialogues to users.

And we'll also learn about additional interactivity elements

we might want to use in our apps.

We'll also learn how we can handle basic user input,

how we can validate user input to make sure

that we're working with valid data.

And as mentioned before, we'll dive into themeing

and how we can easily style our entire app

from one single place.

Now to explore all these topics and more,

we'll build another brand new app,

an expense tracker app that allows users

to register their expenses,

and that then also allows users

to see their expenses both in a list and in a chart.

We're going to build this application here

from the ground up with all the features you can see here.

And along the way, whilst building this app,

we will, of course, practice what you already learned

and dive into all these exciting new features.

Transcript
So let's dive right in.

And for that you of course should create another new flutter

project with the flutter create command.

Here, I created a project called EXPENSE_TRACKER

with flutter create expense tracker.

And then attached

to this lecture you find a main.dart file,

which you should use

to replace your main.dart file in your project with

or simply copy the content of the attached main.dart file

and replace your main.dart file's content with it.

And also make sure you create an expenses.dart file,

which at the moment will be empty

because that is the file

where I want to create my main user interface

or where I want to get started with creating that interface.

And to get started, we of course,

first of all should take another look at that interface

and at the core features we have there.

And if you take a look at the finished app, you see

that there are a couple of things on that user interface.

In the end we have that chart,

and then below that chart we have that list of expenses.

But of course we also have this bar,

this toolbar at the top you could say,

which has this icon button, which we can tap

to open this modal overlay here, which then allows us

to insert a new expense.

So that's also something we'll have to add.

Therefore, these expenses widget here in the end should give

us these three main areas here on that starting screen,

that toolbar or app bar as it's called in Flutters world

at the top.

Then below that, the chart,

and then below that the list of expenses.

And we'll take care about the modal overlay

and so on later.

For that in expenses.dart here,

I'll create a new widget class and I'll name it expenses.

And this should actually be a Stateful Widget which we

built here because of course at some point

we want to start managing expenses.

We want to start adding expenses, for example.

And that then will of course require a UI update

because every time we add a new expense,

we want to, well, update the UI to show

that new expense in the list and to also update the chart.

And since we have that list and chart,

and both are part of that main expenses screen,

which should be this expenses widget here,

it's this expenses widget

that should manage the data in a Stateful way

because you learned that we need a StatefulWidget if we

have data which we want to change,

and where those changes should then update the UI.

Therefore, here we extend StatefulWidget

as we did it multiple times before in this course.

And you also must add this import

to material dart of course.

And in that StatefulWidget,

we have this createState method, which we should add.

And you also learned, of course,

that StateFulWidgets in the end are widgets

that are created with help of two classes.

The first class is the widget class itself,

and the second class is a state class,

which is typically named underscore,

and then your widget name in this case ExpensesState.

And here we want to extend the built in State class,

which is provided by Flutter, which is a generic class

where we basically have to tell Flutter which kind of state

or to which kind of widget this state will be connected.

And here that's the expenses widget.

And in this expenses state class here,

you then must add the build method like this.

And in the build method we'll then

of course return our widget tree.

Now in the createState method in the widget class,

we then should return a new instance

of our ExpensesState created like this.

And we can also change this state here

or this type here to be State of Expenses,

to be a bit more specific, which kind

of State we're creating here.

With that, we of course also must add our constructor

function here to the widget class,

or we should add it at least.

And it can be a const constructor.

And at the moment here, I just want to forward

that named key argument to the parent class.

So with that, we got the basic widget setup

for this expenses widget.

And before, we'll now start working on

that widget tree that we want to return.

We can therefore go back to the main dart file

and there import from our own package from our own

project here, without the typo.

So, import and here my project is named expense_tracker,

and I want import from expenses dart,

and then set my home widget here

to my expenses widget, which I can now use.

And since there we allow for a const constructor,

and MaterialApp also supports const constructors,

we can add const in front of MaterialApp.

With that, we got that all set up.

And now it's time to output something on the screen.

For this year, of course, we have to return a widget

in our build method.

And for the widget that should be returned

I'll pick this Scaffold widget here,

which is another widget we used quite a bit before

because this widget does some general base style setup work.

And it, for example, also sets the background colour

of the app to white.

So here I want to return Scaffold and then add my body here

and set the body of this page here, of this screen,

so to say, to a Column widget.

And I want to use a Column widget here

because in the end I want to have this chart

above this list of expenses.

So I want to have two widgets above each other.

And that basically always means that you want

to use a column because that allows you

to add multiple widgets above each other.

So here we then set the child widgets of that column,

so the widgets that should be above each other.

And here we'll soon have the chart and then the list.

For the moment, I'll just add some Text placeholders,

which will be replaced later.

So here I'll have the chart and this can be const,

or actually we can even add const in front

of this entire list.

And then I have another Text widget

where I will have my Expenses list later on.

As mentioned, these are just placeholders, of course.

Now, if we run this application here again on an Android

emulator, in my case, we should have this white background

and also this text here squeezed into the top left border.

But of course, we'll change the styling soon.

Transcript
So now we get started with this basic

user interface here.

How should we now continue?

Well, there are of course different ways of continuing,

and of course we will need to build this chart

and this expense list widget ultimately.

But I wanna start by creating a model

as a first step in a separate models folder

that I just created here in this lib folder.

Of course you don't have to create this models folder,

but I want to organize my files

and kind of group them by functionality or feature.

Inside of this models folder, we will create a dart file,

which I'll name expense dot dart, where I simply want

to describe which data structure

and expense in this app should have.

So which kind of structure and expense should have.

And for that in this expense dart file,

we can create a class which now won't be a widget.

So where we won't extend state full or state less widget.

And it's a class which will name expense.

And of course we have created a data model

before in this course already here in this app.

I'll do it again because we'll work a lot

with such expenses.

And a single expense will be made up

of different data points, which I simply want

to group together in such a custom class,

in such a custom object blueprint.

So which kind of data should be grouped

into a single expense?

Well, I definitely want to have the title there.

So add a property, a final property

of type string, which I'll name, title.

I also definitely want to have the amount,

and that should be of type double, which is a number

with decimal places.

So that we also support amounts like one dot

99 for example.

And besides title

and amount, I also want to have a unique ID per expense,

which then allows us to identify that expense later on,

which is some information that we, for example,

need to delete expenses.

So therefore I'll add an ID property,

and this will also be of type string.

You could also use an integer ID

to have IDs like one, two, three, and so on.

But here I'll generate a string id,

some unique strings so

that every expense has its own unique id.

And we'll soon add some code that takes care

of generating such an ID automatically.

Now I also want to have a date attached to every expense.

And for this we can use the built in date time data type,

which is a data type built right into dart.

So we don't have to import anything,

we can use it like this.

And date time is simply a special data type that allows us

to store date information in a single value.

And with that here I added four properties that

for this application, which we're building here,

should describe a single expense.

Now of course, we also need a constructor function

that can be called

to well, build such an expense object

based on this blueprint.

And therefore here I want to accept a couple of arguments,

a couple of parameters,

and we could use positional parameters here.

But here, since I'll need a couple of parameters,

I'll actually go for named parameters

because if you expect more than two

or three parameters in a function

or in a constructive function like here,

I personally find it easier to call

that constructive function

if you can target the different parameters by name instead

of having to remember their position

and passing data in the right order to that function.

Using named parameters can simply be a bit easier here.

Therefore, here I wanna accept a named title parameter

to assign a value to title.

And this should be required with help

of the required keyword here.

The same is the case for the amount.

I wanna accept this as well and it should also be required.

Then I also wanna require the date parameter.

And for the ID here, I actually don't wanna require this

as a parameter.

Instead, I want to build such a unique ID dynamically

whenever a new expense object is created.

And to do that, I'll use a third party package,

the UUID package,

which you can install into your flutter project

with this command here like this,

so that we can use this package to generate unique IDs

because that's what this package is all about.

So with this installed here in this expense dot dart file,

we can import from this UUID package

and they are from the UUID DART file.

And this then gives us an object

or a class to be precise, which we can instantiate

to get an object,

the UUID class,

which we can call like this,

to create an object based on it, which I'll store

in a final variable called UUID.

And I do this outside of my class here

because it doesn't belong to this class necessarily.

Instead it's just a utility object,

which we can now use anywhere in this file

to generate unique IDs.

And I want to generate a unique ID for this expense class

whenever it is instantiated.

And for this we can add a so-called initializer list

after the closing parenthesis

of this constructor function here by adding a colon.

And after this colon, you can also initialize the properties

of this class to which this constructor function belongs.

So therefore, here we can then, for example,

target the ID property here

and assign an initial value

that will be assigned when this object is created.

So when this constructor function is called,

and here I want to use this UUID utility object.

And on that object there is a V four method, along

with a couple of other methods,

but it's the V four method, which I want to use here,

which generates a unique string id.

So this then generates a unique ID

and assigns it as an initial value to the ID property

whenever this expense clause is initialized.

This initializer list feature here is a dart feature.

UUID is this third party package which we added.

And here we can now also add cons since UUID supports this

cons constructor.

And since we can add it here,

we can actually also add it here

to turn this entire variable into a cons value,

which we can't reassign

and which we create such

that the value can be stored in memory

and could be reused

by dart if we would use it somewhere else in our code

as well.

Transcript
So now we got started

creating this Expense class and we're almost done.

But there's actually one piece of information missing

that should also belong to Expense objects,

and that's the category to which an expense belongs.

Because in this finished app, which we're building,

every expense has a category attached to it,

which is important for that chart that will be built,

because that chart groups expenses by category.

So therefore here I also wanna store some category

information in my expense class.

And you could now of course say

that you wanna to have a category property,

which is of type String.

This would allow us to add categories as string values

to these expenses as we create them.

But this could be quite error prone,

because if you, for example,

wanna support the category leisure like this,

we could of course create such a Expense object

by calling Expense and passing leisure

like this as a category value.

But it could happen

that we accidentally introduce a typo here,

and we wouldn't get any warning or error when doing so,

because any kind of string value is accepted.

So even though that might not be one

of the categories we wanna support to this app,

we wouldn't get an error, because it is a valid string.

It just wouldn't show up in our chart,

because there we might not look for this category

because it contains a typo.

So for that reason, using a string here is not optimal.

It's too flexible, it allows too many values.

Instead, we wanna create a fixed set of allowed values

so that we have to use one of those values

when creating a new expense.

And for that, we can create a new value

that contains all these allowed values

with another special Dart feature,

the enum feature, the enum keyword.

enum is a keyword that allows us to create a custom type.

You could say that could be named Category here,

which simply is a combination of predefined allowed values.

You define those allowed values

between opening and closing curly braces.

So this simply is the enum syntax in Dart.

And then here,

between those opening and closing curly braces,

you list your enum values.

For example, here, for the Expense categories

that we wanna support in this app here,

I wanna have food, travel, leisure, and work.

And of course you could add more though.

These will be the categories I will later output

in my chart.

So with that, we're simply saying that in this project,

in this Dart project, in this app here,

we wanna have a custom type category

that supports these possible values.

Please note that these values are not wrapped in quotes.

So we don't have string values here technically,

but nonetheless,

this entire syntax here is recognized by Dart

and treats these values kind of like string values.

You will see how we can access them

as text later on in this section.

But now with that, we can use Category

as a custom type here for this category value

in our Expense class.

And now of course, we also wanna accept categories

as input values.

And for this here, I will also accept a category parameter,

a named category parameter, which is required.

And that's now the finished Expense model for the moment.

We'll fine tune and change it a little bit later,

but that's the model for the moment.

And with that model defined, we can now switch back

to the UI and make sure that we use that model there.

And for example, output a list of expenses.

Transcript
So now we got started

creating this Expense class and we're almost done.

But there's actually one piece of information missing

that should also belong to Expense objects,

and that's the category to which an expense belongs.

Because in this finished app, which we're building,

every expense has a category attached to it,

which is important for that chart that will be built,

because that chart groups expenses by category.

So therefore here I also wanna store some category

information in my expense class.

And you could now of course say

that you wanna to have a category property,

which is of type String.

This would allow us to add categories as string values

to these expenses as we create them.

But this could be quite error prone,

because if you, for example,

wanna support the category leisure like this,

we could of course create such a Expense object

by calling Expense and passing leisure

like this as a category value.

But it could happen

that we accidentally introduce a typo here,

and we wouldn't get any warning or error when doing so,

because any kind of string value is accepted.

So even though that might not be one

of the categories we wanna support to this app,

we wouldn't get an error, because it is a valid string.

It just wouldn't show up in our chart,

because there we might not look for this category

because it contains a typo.

So for that reason, using a string here is not optimal.

It's too flexible, it allows too many values.

Instead, we wanna create a fixed set of allowed values

so that we have to use one of those values

when creating a new expense.

And for that, we can create a new value

that contains all these allowed values

with another special Dart feature,

the enum feature, the enum keyword.

enum is a keyword that allows us to create a custom type.

You could say that could be named Category here,

which simply is a combination of predefined allowed values.

You define those allowed values

between opening and closing curly braces.

So this simply is the enum syntax in Dart.

And then here,

between those opening and closing curly braces,

you list your enum values.

For example, here, for the Expense categories

that we wanna support in this app here,

I wanna have food, travel, leisure, and work.

And of course you could add more though.

These will be the categories I will later output

in my chart.

So with that, we're simply saying that in this project,

in this Dart project, in this app here,

we wanna have a custom type category

that supports these possible values.

Please note that these values are not wrapped in quotes.

So we don't have string values here technically,

but nonetheless,

this entire syntax here is recognized by Dart

and treats these values kind of like string values.

You will see how we can access them

as text later on in this section.

But now with that, we can use Category

as a custom type here for this category value

in our Expense class.

And now of course, we also wanna accept categories

as input values.

And for this here, I will also accept a category parameter,

a named category parameter, which is required.

And that's now the finished Expense model for the moment.

We'll fine tune and change it a little bit later,

but that's the model for the moment.

And with that model defined, we can now switch back

to the UI and make sure that we use that model there.

And for example, output a list of expenses.

Transcript
So let's now output these expenses in a list.

And for that, I'll replace this Text widget here,

which acted as a placeholder, with an actual list.

But I'll not add this list here in this _ExpensesState,

instead, I'll create a separate widget

to keep this widget or this state,

which belongs to the Expenses widget, lean,

and to especially keep its build function lean and simple.

Because that is considered a good practice,

keeping your build functions lean

and not putting too much logic into them.

That's typically what you want to strive for.

So therefore, here, I'll add a new file,

expenses_list.dart sounds like a fitting file name.

Because in there, I'll add a new class,

the ExpensesList class,

which now will be used for creating a widget.

And therefore, this must extend

one of Flutter's widget base classes.

And here a StatelessWidget is all we need

because we won't manage any internal data in that list.

Instead, we'll just output the list of expenses

that is defined here.

We don't manage that list, we just output it.

And therefore, this will be a StatelessWidget.

And of course, it needs this build method.

And in this build method,

I then want to return my list in the end.

Now, before we create that list,

we, of course, must make sure

that the ExpensesList widget class here

accepts this list of expenses as input.

For that, we need to add the constructor function,

which here can be a const constructor function.

And of course, we want to forward that key as always.

But then I'll accept more named parameters

because I want to have some properties in here.

To be precise, I'll start with one property,

we'll add another property later in this section.

But this one property, which I'll add here,

is my list of expenses.

So here I'll use the built-in List type.

And it's a generic type, as you already know,

and it is basically a list full of expenses.

Hence, I'll add my custom Expense class.

And by using this suggested option here,

my editor also automatically adds this import

to the expense.dart file.

So here I'm using this Expense type here

to combine it with the List type.

And then here this property can be named expenses.

And I now also have this required named expenses parameter,

which is used to assign a value to this expenses property.

And now we can use this expenses property here

in the build method to output this list of expenses.

Now, thus far in the course,

whenever we had multiple items

that should be displayed above each other,

we used the Column widget.

And this is a great widget

for outputting widgets above each other.

You can use it for a list content too, therefore.

But if you have lists of unclear length

that could potentially get quite long,

as it is the case here, for this expenses list,

users could add 100 or 1,000 expenses

when the app is up and running.

So when you have a list of unknown length

that will potentially get very long,

Column is not ideal.

Because with Column, all the widgets that you add to it

will be created behind the scenes by Flutter

whenever this widget that outputs this Column

becomes active.

So that means if you have a list with 1,000 items,

all these items will be created behind the scenes by Flutter

at the point of time where this list widget

is displayed on the screen.

The problem with that is, of course,

that only a small amount of those expenses

is actually needed because only a small amount

of the expense list items that will display here

will be visible on the screen.

We will have a scrollable list, of course,

and most of those items, therefore,

won't be visible initially.

Hence, creating all these invisible items

behind the scenes at the beginning

is really redundant and costs a lot of performance.

That's why you should not use Column

for lists where you don't know the length,

but where you might have a lot of items at the end.

Instead, Flutter gives you a different widget

that should be used for such situations,

and that's the ListView widget.

Now ListView can also be created like this,

and you can pass children to it.

If you do that, you get a scrollable list,

which still creates all items immediately

when this list is displayed on the screen.

So the only thing we gain here

is that this is automatically scrollable.

But it's still not ideal for this scenario here

where we might have many items

that won't be visible initially.

Instead, here we should not use ListView like this,

but use a special constructor that's offered by it,

the builder constructor function.

This is a special constructor function

for this ListView widget,

which in the end tells Flutter

that it should create a scrollable list.

ListViews are always scrollable lists by default.

But that it should build, create,

those list items only when they are visible

or about to become visible,

not if they're not visible.

For that, builder takes an itemBuilder parameter,

which is of type Function.

So which wants a function as a value.

And of course, you learned before in the course already

that you can pass functions as values for parameters.

So that's what we need to do here.

And it wants a function that will get

two input values itself.

Those will be provided automatically by Flutter.

And it should then return a widget.

So this function, which we pass as a value to itemBuilder,

should return a widget,

the list item that should be created when needed.

So for this here, I'll create an anonymous function.

You could also create a separate method here,

and then just point at it.

But here I'll go for an anonymous function.

And I'll get a context object and an index value

automatically provided by Flutter.

That's what you can see here.

And I'll get back to this index value a little bit later.

And then we must return the widget.

And for this, you could define your function like this,

and then return your widget here.

Or you use this super short function form

by using this arrow, where you then immediately

define the value that should be returned.

And I'll do that here

since all I want to do in this function

is return a value.

And the widget that should be returned here,

in this case here for a start,

will simply be a Text widget,

though we'll change this later.

And here, in this text widget,

I want to output the title of the expense,

which we are displaying here.

Now, for that, of course,

we, first of all, need to tell Flutter

which items it should build with this ListView,

because we're not doing this right now.

To tell Flutter which items should be included,

we can pass another parameter to this builder method,

to this builder constructor function.

itemBuilder is required,

but we can also pass more arguments.

As you can see, a long list of parameters

that can be set, actually.

Now, these different parameters can be used

to configure the behavior of ListView,

and definitely feel free to browse through them,

also with help of the official documentation.

But here it's the itemCount parameter that should be set.

Because itemCount, in the end,

defines how many list items will be rendered eventually.

And for that, of course, I want to pass

the length of this ExpensesList as a value.

So expenses.length.

Because this built-in length property can be used

to get the number of items in this expenses list

that we get as an input here in this widget.

And that number of items is exactly what we need

as a value for itemCount,

so that Flutter knows how many items

should be displayed here.

And that's now where this index becomes important.

Flutter calls this function here,

which we pass as a value to itemBuilder,

as often as defined here by itemCount in the end.

So if itemCount is two,

because we have two items in our list,

this function here will be called twice.

And for every function call,

index will be a different number.

It will be zero for the first item

because list indexes in Dart,

as in many other programming languages,

start at zero, as you already learned.

And it will be one for the second item, therefore.

So therefore, here we can get the title of the expense

for which a list item is being created here

by reaching out to expenses.

So to this expenses property.

Then using the square bracket notation,

since expenses is a list,

to access a specific expense by index.

And then, of course,

since we want to get the title of that expense,

we use the dot notation on that single expense

to which we now got access to access the title.

And with that, we're outputting

this expense title in a Text widget here

with help of this ListView widget provided by Flutter

by using this builder constructor function

to make sure that all the items

are only created when they're needed.

And if you have a long list of expenses,

this can significantly improve

the performance of your application.

Transcript
So, with that, we got a first version

of this ExpensesList widget,

and back in expenses.dart,

we can now use this custom widget.

So here, below this chart placeholder,

I'll use ExpensesList.

Of course, you also must add a import

to your expenses_list.dart file here

in order to use this widget here

in the expenses.dart file.

And now we must pass a value

for this named expenses parameter,

and here that's my registeredExpenses list.

That's the list of expenses

that should be displayed on the screen.

Hence we can refer to it like this here.

Now here I have to remove the const keyword

and add it just in front of text

because even though ExpensesList supports

the const keyword in theory,

we can't use const in front of this widget

if we're referring to List property here,

which could be changed later on.

It could be changed despite being final

because we will still be able to add new values

to this list which is one single object in memory.

We just wouldn't be able to assign a new value

to registeredExpenses.

But that's also something I'll get back to

later in the course.

With that, if we save this, we should now see our list here

except for that we don't,

and the reason for us not seeing the list

is that expenses displays a column,

and in that column we now got a list.

So, in the end, another kind of column inside of a column.

If you have combinations like this,

you will always run into problems with Flutter

because it then doesn't know how to size

or how to restrict the inner column,

and you can then solve this problem

by wrapping this inner column or column-like widget

with the Expanded widget

and set the child of Expanded to this inner column

or ListView in this case.

And, with that, we now see our list here.

And here's the text widget above it

which is this chart placeholder.

Of course, again, styling is all not final,

but it's a start,

and we're outputting this dummy list now,

and we're actually doing so in a way

that's optimized for performance.

Transcript
Now that we got our expenses list,

it's time to work on these list items again.

Because of course we got this text here,

but the goal later is to not just output some text,

not just output the titles of those expenses,

but instead to output all the expense

information that's relevant.

For that, I'll create another new file

because I want to create another new widget

which then will be used for these expense items.

Again, to keep the build method

of this expenses list widget relatively lean,

since you will see that the expense item widget,

which I'm about to create,

will actually combine many other widgets again.

So for that, I'll add a new file.

And since this will be a file with a widget

that's closely related to this expenses list,

I'll organize my code such that I add a widgets folder.

And in that widgets folder,

I'll add an expenses list folder.

And I'll then move expenses list dart

into this expenses list folder.

And in that folder, also create an expense underscore item

dart file, which will then be that file

that contains the class, the widget class that will be used

for outputting the individual list items in that list.

And I'll also move the expenses dart file

into the widgets folder, not into expenses list,

but into the widgets folder

so that in the end of my project,

I have the main.dart file,

and then I have the models folder with expense dart

and the widgets folder with expenses dart

and expenses list,

this expenses list folder with its two widgets.

And organizing the code like this

is of course totally optional,

but it can help with ensuring

that your project stays manageable.

So here we can now create a new class

in this expense item dart file,

and that's the expense item class

which extends state less widget again,

state less widget because there won't be any internal data

that would need to be managed.

And of course here we again need the build method

and we also need a constructor expense item

because we again need to get some input data here.

We need the expense data

that should be displayed on the screen.

For this, I'll add a new property to the expense item class,

which should be of type expense.

And of course for that,

you again must add the import to this expense dart file

in the models folder in your project folder

so that I can add my expense property,

which is of this type here.

And then in this constructor,

we can set this to mix things up here

with a positional argument though you could also wrap this

into curly braces to turn it into a named argument.

Positional arguments by default are always required,

hence the required annotation is not needed

and not supported here.

And we still of course also need to add a second

acceptor parameter, which is a named parameter

and hence wrapped between curly braces.

And that would be this key parameter,

which is then forwarded to the parent class

to the stateless widget class.

With that, we can now output our widget,

our combination of widgets down here.

And here for this expense item,

you can of course definitely play around

with the different widgets supported by Flutter

with the things you'll already learn about

throughout the course.

This is a great exercise, so definitely do that.

Here for this widget,

I chose to start by wrapping everything

with the card widget,

which is a widget we haven't seen before.

This is a widget which I simply use for styling purposes

because this will give us a nice card look.

It will basically put the content that we pass to card

into a container that's a bit elevated

that has a slight shadow behind itself

to make it stand out a bit more.

I can show you how it looks by setting the child parameter,

the named child parameter on this card widget

and set this to the text widget.

And now here I want to access expense title.

This is not the final definition of my expense item,

but this allows me to show you

how this card widget will look like.

So here I output expense title,

and now we can use expense item

in the expenses list dart file by going down here

and removing this text widget in the item builder function.

And instead we wanna create our expense item here.

If I use this auto suggestion menu here,

it again automatically adds the import for me.

Otherwise you must add this import manually to your project,

the widgets folder expenses list,

and then expense item dart.

And with that added down here,

we can create an expense item by instantiating it,

and I then wanna pass a single expense to it.

So I access my list of expenses that I get here,

then use the index again with the square bracket notation

to access a single expense.

And that's then the value

that should be passed as a value to expense item.

Since there, we expect to get an entire expense.

And with that, if I force a reload,

you now see the titles again.

But if you look closely,

you see that there is this slight drop shadow

and that's this card look.

It doesn't look too amazing here

because we got no other styling and no other widgets,

but I want to have this elevated look here

to make these items stand out at least a little bit.

A card also automatically adds

some top and bottom margin

so that we have some spacing between those items.

It's a bit hard to see here,

but it's a subtle effect

that will make the items look better,

especially once we're done adding all the other widgets

that should be added here to expense item,

which is what I will do next.

So here at expense item, we now have this card.

As a next step, I want to add some padding to this card.

Now, card does not have a padding parameter

that could be set.

It has a margin parameter with which we could change

or extend the default margin that is added anyways,

but it doesn't have a padding parameter.

And if you recall, padding simply is this internal space,

so some spacing which I want to add

between the text and the border of this card.

Now you can still add padding

by refactoring this text widget

and wrapping it with the padding widget.

This then allows us to set some padding.

And here, I don't want to add the same padding

in all directions,

instead, I'll use the special symmetric constructor function

on edge insets, which is this utility class

provided by Flutter

that's used for creating margins and paddings.

And here, I wanna set my horizontal padding to let's say 20,

and then my vertical padding to let's say 16.

And with that, you now see that there is some spacing

between the borders of this card widget

and the actual content, the text,

which already ensures that this looks a bit nicer,

I'd argue.

Now of course, that's still not all though.

I don't just wanna have the text in there.

Instead, the goal is

to later have the text here in the first row, so to say,

and to then have a second row of data

inside of that card which displays us, for example,

the amount, but also the date and category.

So therefore here, since I wanna have two rows,

we need the column widget again.

And here it's column and not list view

because it doesn't need to be scrollable

and list view makes it scrollable by default,

but we don't need this here, it's not a long list.

And we also don't need that performance optimization

because it is a list that's guaranteed

to consist of only two rows inside of this item.

Of course, we might have multiple items,

but we are optimizing those

by displaying them with list view.

Inside of a single item,

since we will only have these two rows,

we don't need that list view.

So here we can then set children

and children here should be set to multiple widgets.

And the first widget will be the text widget again,

which indeed will output the expense title again.

We'll change its styling later,

but in general we want to output the title

as the first row in this item.

But now, we're going to add more widgets.

I will actually add another row,

technically a third row if you wanna call it like this,

by using SizedBox to add some fixed spacing,

a fixed height between the text

and the actual second row,

the actual visible second row, you could say.

Instead, we could also use margin

wrapped around the first or second row,

but this is simply a bit quicker.

Now I want to add that actual second row,

and that will now actually not just be a single widget

as we have it here in the first row

where it's just the text,

but instead, it will be the amount,

and then to the right of that,

it will be a combination of the category

or an icon representing that category and the date.

So therefore here we need the row widget

because that's what we can use if we wanna display

multiple widgets next to each other horizontally.

For that, we add children here.

And the first child here is now another text widget,

which is in general,

a widget you'll use a lot when building Flutter apps.

Because here I want to output the amount

that belongs to this expense.

For this, we can of course access expense amount like this.

However, you see I get an error here

because this is actually of type double

and the text widget wants a string.

Now we can convert it to a string by calling two string,

but I will actually call a different method.

I will call the toStringAsFixed method,

which then wants an argument, which I'll set to two here.

But what does this do?

Well, toStringAsFixed simply ensures

that a value like 12.3433

would simply be displayed like this

so that it is limited to two digits after the comma.

That's what this does.

So it's simply a stylistic choice here to make sure that

if users would enter amounts

with too many decimal places, we only display two.

I actually also wanna display the dollar sign

in front of this amount.

And for that, we can wrap this with single quotes,

but now this would all be treated as text

and therefore I'll instead use this injection syntax,

which I've shown you before in the course

with the dollar symbol,

which now won't be displayed as a dollar symbol,

but which instead tells Dart

that we want to inject a value into the string,

but here the value is actually the result

of a more complex expression instead of a single variable.

And therefore here you actually have to extend this syntax

and add a opening curly brace,

and at the end, a closing curly brace.

And this simply tells Dart

that it should take this value here as one value

that should be injected into this string.

Now, as I mentioned, I wanna output a dollar sign

in front of this string

and this dollar sign won't be output,

instead, that belongs to Dart.

If I do wanna output a dollar sign,

I instead have to escape that character as it's called

by adding a backwards slash

in front of this special dollar sign here.

This backward slash now won't be output,

instead, this now tells Dart that this dollar sign

after the backward slash should be output as text

and should not be treated as this special injection syntax.

So here we won't see two dollar signs on the screen,

but instead this second dollar sign

belongs to this injection syntax

and this first dollar sign will be output

because we're escaping it as it's called.

And with that,

we should display this amount below the title.

Indeed, if we save this,

we should already be able to see this.

Of course, we'll soon make sure

that the title won't be centered anymore,

but in general, this doesn't look too bad.

We have the title, we have the amount,

and we have this dollar sign in front of the amount.

Now we're still not done

with the expense item widget here though.

We're now outputting the title and the amount,

but there's more information that should be output.

In this row here,

so in the same row as we're outputting the amount,

I also wanna output information

about the category and the date.

And for this, I'll add a row inside of this row

because I wanna group category and date together.

They should be output next to each other,

but they should be pushed

all the way to the right in this card here.

So the amount should stay on the left

and the other information,

the other two items should be displayed

next to each other horizontally, but pushed to the right.

Hence we have to put them into a separate collection,

you could say a separate group of widgets.

And since I want to output category

and date next to each other horizontally,

I will group them together with row.

But I'm doing this so that between this amount text

and this row, I can add another widget

and that will be the special spacer widget,

which is also built into Flutter

and which can be created with const.

Spacer is simply a widget that can be used

in any column or row to tell Flutter

that it should create a widget

that takes up all the space it can get

between the other widget between which it is placed.

So text gets all the space it needs to output the text.

And this row will get all the space it needs

to output its child items.

But spacer then will always take all the remaining space,

hence pushing text to the left and this to the right.

And now with that, we of course can and should

add children to that inner row.

And here we now want to have this category

or this icon that represents the category

and then next to it, the date.

Now for the icon, we can use the built-in icon widget,

which can be used for displaying an icon.

And for the moment, I'll just use a dummy icon here.

We'll soon use a dynamic icon,

which will depend on the category.

For the moment, I'll just use any icon here.

Like for example, let's say the alarm icon.

And then next to that, I'll add a sized box

to add some distance between this icon and the date

with a width of eight, for example.

And next to that,

I have my text that should output the date.

And we can also add const here

though that will soon change

since soon this won't be a hard coded dummy icon anymore,

but for the moment, it can be const.

But now for this text here,

I want to output the date of my expense.

And for that, we can of course access expense date.

But this would be of type date time, not of type string.

And it also wouldn't be formatted at all.

Now we'll soon take care of formatting.

For the moment, we'll just convert it to a string

by calling to string.

This will make sure

that the date will be output as a text date.

Well, and with all of that, if you save this,

you should see all this information on the screen.

You see the title here, you see the amount,

and of course you also see this icon for the category.

And then next to it, the date which looks ugly as mentioned

because it's not formatted at all.

And indeed, that's the next thing we'll take care of.

We'll make sure that the icon is actually chosen

dynamically, that it depends on the category of the expense,

and we'll make sure that the date is formatted

in a more human readable way.

Transcript
Now for both the dynamic icon

and the formatted date, I'll actually go back

to my expense start in the models folder,

because in there I want to tweak the expense class

to make outputting a formatted date a bit easier.

And I want to add a new value to this file.

So not to the expense class, but to the file as a whole.

Here I want to add a constant value called category icons,

or the constant is called category icons.

And the values should be a map where the keys will be

category enum values.

And the values

of those keys in this map will be the actual icons

that should be displayed for the different categories

so that in this expense dart file,

we don't just store the definition

of our expense value objects,

but instead we also store the available categories

and the icons that belong to these categories.

You could split this across multiple files,

but here I'll keep it all in one file.

So here my keys are these different enum values like

category food with the dot notation here.

And then the value set with a colon here in a map

as you learn before in this course would be an icon.

And here I'll use Flutter's built-in icons class,

which of course must be imported.

So material dot dart from Flutter must be imported.

And then here for food, I'll use the lunch dining icon.

And of course you can browse through all those icons

and pick the icons you like most.

But I'll use this one for the food category.

Then for the travel category, I'll use icons,

flight underscore takeoff.

For the leisure category, I'll use icons dot movie.

And for the last category, the work category,

I'll use icons dot work.

So these are my icons

and I'll soon use them here in expense item dart.

But before we do that, I want to tweak this expense class.

This class at the moment is simply defined

to define the data structure of our expense objects.

And this is of course very useful

because that allows us to create such expense objects

with ease and it gives us auto completion

and type safety when working with them.

But of course, you can not just store properties in classes.

Instead, you can also add methods to classes.

And here we could add a method called Get Formatted date,

though if you find yourself defining methods that start

with get as a name

or that are in the end all about transforming one

of these property values, you could, instead

of creating such a method, also create a so-called getter

for that you use the special get keyword built into dart,

and then the name of your getter,

which now should be named like any other property,

for example, formatted date.

And you should also define your return value.

So the type of value that will be produced by this getter.

And you skip these parentheses.

Instead, you just have opening and closing curly braces.

And between those curly braces, you return your value,

which should depend on your other property values.

And here I wanna reach out to my date

property and format that.

Now formatting dates manually in Dart is quite cumbersome.

And for that reason we'll use another third party package

here, the Intel INTL package

for which you can simply search to find it on pub dev.

And as always, you can learn more about this package here.

It's a quite powerful package that can help

with the localization as well.

But here we'll use it to output a formatted date.

And for that we'll just add it to this project,

a running Flutter pub at Intel.

And with it added in this

expense dart file, we can import it just

as we import it Flutter

or the UUID package by importing intel.

And then here the Intel Dart file.

That's what we need here.

And now with that package imported,

we can use the date format class, which is

provided by this Intel package.

And there the YMD constructor function

and will store the value

of calling this constructor function in a final variable

that could be called formatter.

And YMD simply creates a formatter object,

which we can then use to format dates.

So it's a utility object you could say, created with help

of the date format class,

and this special constructor function

provided by the Intel package.

And this YMD constructive function defines

how the date will be formatted.

And indeed date format supports many constructive functions

that could be used to format dates in all kind

of different versions.

Y stands for a year, M for month and D four day,

and YMD used like this is just one

of those predefined formatting options.

So now we can use this formatter object down here

in this getter.

And on that object you can call the format method

and then pass your date to it.

And this will return a string containing the formatted

version of that date.

So the more human readable version.

And now with this formatted date added

and this icon map added here,

we can use this information here in expense item.

And for the icon here in this inner row, instead

of always using the hardcoded alarm, we can now reach out

to our category icons map, which we have in

that other file,

and use this square bracket notation here

to access a specific item in that map.

And since in that map we use Enum values as keys.

We also have to use such a enum value as a key

to access an icon, which is no problem

because in our expense object with which we're working here,

we have this category property,

which stores enum values of that category, enum.

Now we also have to remove const here though,

because this isn't a const value anymore.

Instead, this is generated dynamically well

and forward a date.

We now access expense, dot formatted date.

You don't add parentheses here

because it's a getter, not a method.

If you did define formatted date as a method instead,

which you could also do, you would call it as a method.

But here we're using this getter version.

With all that done, this now looks way better

because now we got different icons for different expenses.

And as you can also see, we got formatted dates here,

which are way more human readable.

Transcript
So we're making progress,

but of course, for example,

the styling still isn't where it should be.

But we'll take care about this later

because I think the more important thing right now

is to make sure that we're not limited

to those dummy expenses, which we created here.

It's good to have them to create that list

and these list items.

But of course, ultimately the goal is

that users can add their own expenses.

That is what this app will be all about.

And if you recall the final version of the app,

you might also remember

that there we had this toolbar at the top, this AppBar,

this plus button at the top here, which we could tap

to bring up that modal overlay that allows us

to enter new expenses, to insert new expense data.

So of course we have to work on that modal overlay,

but first of all, we have to add this toolbar at the top.

Now for that and the expenses Dart file in this column

where we want to have the chart,

and then also this list of expenses,

we could of course add this Toolbar

with the Add button here

and try to use a Row widget, for example.

We could do that, but having such a toolbar at the top

is such a common requirement

and is often needed for so many different things.

For example, also to output a title

that Flutter actually has a more official support for that

and does not force us

to build our own here instead of this column.

Instead, this scaffold widget is not just there

to give us this white background and some basic styling,

but besides doing that,

it also supports multiple other arguments

besides the body parameter, which we set

to the main page body.

It, for example, also has this AppBar parameter.

It also has other parameters which we'll

see later in the course.

For example, drawer for adding a side drawer.

But as mentioned, we'll see

that later in the course in another course section.

But here it's the AppBar parameter, which we want to set

because AppBar can be used

to add such a bar at the top of the screen.

AppBar wants a PreferredSizeWidget, which simply means

that it only takes certain kinds of widgets.

And typically you use the AppBar widget here,

which is another widget built into Flutter.

Now the AppBar widget then takes a couple

of configuration parameters as you see,

and as always, feel free to browse through them.

But most importantly for us here,

it offers an actions parameter, which we can set

and actions wants a list of widgets,

and this is typically used

to display buttons in this top AppBar in this toolbar

at the top of the screen.

Now here you could add a text button or an elevated button

or any other kind of button you already saw in this course,

but here I'll use the icon button instead,

which is another built-in type of button,

another built-in widget you can use in Flutter

to display a button

that only contains an icon.

So not text and icon, but just an icon.

For that, icon button needs the icon named parameter

to be set and it should be set to a widget.

But of course here typically you use the

built-in Icon widget.

And here I'll use the built-in add Icon widget like this.

Now this icon widget is actually const,

so we can add const here, but that's not all we have to set.

Instead, since it's a button,

we should also set onPressed here

and onPressed just as on the text button,

which we already saw before in the course, wants a function

as a value, an anonymous function, or a function defined

before in your class.

Here, I'll for the moment,

set it to an empty anonymous function.

Now with that, if you save this,

you have this AppBar here at the top,

which might look like this or which might look like this.

It simply depends on whether you're using the Material

2 ow 3 look, and at the point

of time I'm recording this, Material2 was still

the default, though no worries.

I built the entire course

with Material3 in mind.

But if you still had that other look with that blue bar,

you can go to your main Dart file

and simply add this line

to your MaterialApp constructor function

and set the theme parameter to ThemeData.

And there set useMaterial3 to true,

and I'll get back to theming later in this section,

but you can do this now already

to get this more modern AppBar look here.

Either way, you have this plus button here,

this icon button, which we just added, of course.

What you can also see is that now

that the AppBar was added, Flutter made sure

that all the content,

including the AppBar, fits better into this screen.

It basically automatically reserves the space needed

for the camera and so on to not be occupied by widgets.

And instead make sure that your widgets like the AppBar

or this chart widget

or this list widget all go below this space up here,

which it reserves for these device inputs and so on.

So we get all of that just by adding AppBar.

And as mentioned, actions are important,

but not the only thing you can set on AppBar.

Instead, there are many other parameters

as well that can be set.

For example, you could change the background color,

but again, I will come back to styling

and theming later in this section.

But you can, for example, also set a title here,

which again is a widget, typically a text widget.

And here we could set this to Flutter ExpenseTracker

and turn this into a constant widget like this.

So with that added here, we also have this title here,

and that's how you can add such an AppBar.

Again, we'll take care of styling later.

As a next step,

I instead wanna make sure

that pressing this plus button actually does something

and that it opens this modal overlay, which then allows us

to add new expenses.

Transcript
So let's now make sure

that clicking this plus button in this app bar here

does open this modal overlay at the bottom,

which then does allow us to enter new expenses.

For that, of course, we have to work on this function here,

which we assigned to the onPressed argument

of this icon button

because that is the function that will be triggered

when the button is pressed.

And we could edit it here inside of this build method.

So we could work right inside of this

anonymous function here.

Or alternatively, what I will do here,

we can add a new method

to this _ExpensesState class.

And this method here could be called openAddExpenseOverlay

or anything like that.

The name is, of course, up to you.

It's a method that doesn't need to return anything,

hence it's return type is void.

And inside of the curly braces,

so between the curly braces,

we're going to add the logic for showing this overlay.

But before we do that,

we wanna assign this function as a value to onPressed

by pointing at it like this

as you learned without parentheses

since we don't want to execute the function here,

instead we want to use it as a value for onPressed

so that Flutter internally, so to say,

can execute this function here

whenever this button is pressed.

Now inside of openAddExpenseOverlay,

I now wanna execute some code

that does open such an overlay.

And thankfully here we can use a built-in feature.

If we type show here, we can get a long list

of built-in functions

that are all provided by Flutter

that we can call to show built-in UI elements,

like a date picker or a dialogue box.

And we'll see some of these things,

for example, the date picker a little bit later.

Now here it's actually the modal bottom sheet

which we want to show.

So it's show modal bottom sheet, which we want to execute

inside of this openAddExpenseOverlay function.

And this show modal bottom sheet function here

is provided by a Flutter.

And hence it's available

because of this material dart import,

which as you can tell by now,

really unlocks many things, many widgets

and also, for example, this utility function.

Now this function will dynamically add a new UI element,

such a modal overlay when it's being executed.

And since I created it here

by using the suggestion whilst typing it,

my code editor automatically set it up

to use two named arguments, context and builder

to which we have to pass values

when calling show modal bottom sheet.

Because these are two required arguments

that must be set when using this function.

Now, context here wants a build context value.

For example, this context here,

which we get automatically as an input to the build method.

So which is passed to the build method by Flutter.

Here we're outside of the build method,

and yet there actually is a globally available

context object, a context property

that's made available by Flutter automatically

since we're in a class that extends state.

When you're in a class that extends state,

Flutter automatically adds a context property

to your class behind the scenes, so to say.

It's provided by this state parent class.

And this context property that's made available by Flutter

can be used as a value for this context argument

that must be set on show modal bottom sheet.

But for that, it's of course, important to understand

what this context thing is all about.

And in the end, you can think of this context object,

this context value as some kind of metadata collection.

An object full of metadata managed by Flutter

that belongs to a specific widget.

So every widget has its own context object

and that contains metadata information

related to the widget and very important,

related to the widgets position in the overall UI,

in the overall widget tree.

So this context value which we get here

holds information about this expenses widget in the end

and its position in the widget tree

as you'll also see if you hover over this context value.

Now this object, which is full of metadata,

is required by show modal bottom sheet,

which is why you have to pass it

as a value for the context argument here.

And the second argument that must be set

is another builder argument.

And whenever you see an argument called builder,

it basically always means

that you must provide a function as a value.

And here it's a function

that should return a widget

and that automatically gets

one input value passed into it by Flutter,

which we'll call this builder function basically

when it then tries to show this modal bottom sheet.

So here we can set up a function,

which gets a context value.

And here I name this context parameters ctx

so that I don't clash with this context.

I could use the same name,

but technically it's a different context

because it's the context of this modal bottom sheet

that will be created.

So the information object related to that,

instead of the information object

related to the expenses widget,

and hence I choose a different name here.

And inside of this function body,

you now to return your widget

that should basically be displayed

when Flutter renders this modal bottom sheet

that it's opening up.

And therefore, here we can again use

this very short notation using this arrow syntax

since here we return that widget that should be shown.

And to get something on the screen quickly,

I'll again use the text widget here as a placeholder

and just say modal bottom sheet

and add a semicolon at the end here

and a comma here for formatting reasons.

And now, this is the code that we must execute in here

to show some modal bottom sheet.

And, of course, the text widget will soon be replaced

with the actual content that should be in that modal sheet.

So with that, if you save everything

and you click this plus button,

you should now get such a modal sheet at the bottom.

At the moment, just a tiny one

because there isn't a lot of content in there,

but there is this overlay,

which closes if you click on that backdrop

that also opened up.

You see that the background gets grayed out

when this sheet at the bottom opens.

And if we click on that backdrop, the sheet closes again.

So that's how we can open and close it.

And now, of course, we have to work on the content

inside of that modal bottom sheet,

and we also might want to add

some additional configuration to it

to make sure that it behaves correctly.

Transcript
So let's now replace this text widget

with the actual widget

that should be shown in this ModalBottomSheet.

And for this, I'll add a new file

because this widget,

which I wanna show in this bottom sheet, will be this form,

this combination of input elements

that can be used by the user to describe a new expense.

And since I'll have a couple of widgets there

and some logic attached to them,

I wanna move that to a new file.

So here I'll create a new file in that widgets folder,

which I'll name, new_expense.dart.

So that's my file name.

And in there we wanna create a new class,

the NewExpense class,

which of course extends a widget class.

And here it'll be the StatefulWidget since I will need

to manage some internal state here in the future.

So therefore here we're extending StatefulWidget.

We need to add the createState method here,

and of course, the constructor function

for this new expense widget.

And at the moment here, I'll just accept

and forward the key argument.

And then we add this second class

that's always added to your StatefulWidgets,

the _NewExpenseState class, which extends state,

which is linked to NewExpense like this.

And here for the createState method,

we can also replace StatefulWidget

with NewExpense like this.

And here in the NewExpenseState class,

we of course must add this build method.

And here in createState, we have to return a new instance

of NewExpenseState like this.

And here in the build method, we now of course have

to return our combination of widgets

that should define this form, which can be used by the user

to enter the expense data.

For that, I'll return a widget here,

and I'll start by returning a Padding widget, actually,

since I want to have some spacing around this form

so that it doesn't sit right on the edges

of this ModalBottomSheet.

So here we add padding

and set padding to EdgeInsets.

And then here for the moment, I'll set this to all(16).

And I'll add the const keyword later

once we finalize this widget combination

and we know where exactly we can add it.

So here I added my padding.

Now we also must add the child argument

and then of course, define which widget should be wrapped

with the padding.

And in the end, in this finished form

that should be shown on the screen,

I'll have multiple rows of input elements,

you could say.

I have this title input element in the first row,

and then in the second row I have the amount

and the date input element.

And then in the third row at the bottom,

I have this dropdown, which can be used

for choosing a category.

And then next to it, my buttons that can be used

for canceling input or for submitting the input.

And therefore, since we want to have multiple rows,

it again screams for the column widget.

And we can use column instead of list view here

because we don't need scrollability right now.

And we also don't need to generate those items dynamically.

Instead, we know exactly how many rows we'll have

and therefore we're good to go.

So with that, we can set our child widgets in this column.

And I will start with the input field for the title

of the expense that is about to be added.

And for that we can use the built-in TextField widget

provided by Flutter,

which will display such a text input element.

Flatter has a bunch of built-in input elements.

For example, later we'll also use the dropdown button

for displaying this dropdown.

But here it's TextField for allowing the user

to enter some text.

Now the TextField widget has many parameters

that can be set.

Many niche parameters, which you will rarely need,

but also some very useful parameters like for example,

the max length parameter,

which you can use to set a maximum amount of characters

that can be entered into this input field.

For example, here for our expenses, we could say

that the title of a single expense shouldn't be longer

than 50 characters,

and hence we can enter a value of 50 here.

In addition, we could also set the keyboard type here

to then use the built-in text input type enum,

which is provided by Flutter

to control which virtual keyboard should be opened

when the user taps into this text field.

So that we, for example, open a keyboard that's optimized

for entering email addresses or standard text,

which is the default setting anyways though,

and which we therefore don't have to set explicitly.

And nonetheless, it is important to know about this feature.

Now here for this text field, I don't need that,

but I do want to add a label to the text field

to tell the user which kind of value should be entered there

so that the user doesn't have to guess.

And the label can be added and that's a bit strange

by setting the decoration parameter on the text field.

So I guess you can think of this label text as kind

of a decoration around the actual text input field.

So decoration then wants a input decoration object created

with the built-in InputDecoration class

provided by Flutter.

And InputDecoration offers a label property.

So that's how you add a label to a text field,

you the decoration parameter to an InputDecoration object.

And on that object you can set the label property

and the label wants a widget as you can see.

So therefore here we can use the Text widget,

which is the widget you will typically use for such a label

to give this text field a label of title, for example.

With all of that, we can add const here

to get rid of the blue squiggly lines

and also add it here in front of EdgeInsets.all.

And we should have such a text field.

Now, this is not the final form.

We'll add more to it later.

And at the moment, we're also not handling any input

into this text field, but it's a first step

and I wanna make sure that it's this form,

this basic form here

that will be displayed in this bottom sheet

when it's opened.

And for that, of course, we have to go back to expenses

to this code where we open the ModalBottomSheet,

and instead of showing this tummy text widget here,

I want to create my NewExpense widget instead.

And we can add const in front of this here.

With that, if we save this and I force a reload,

if I open this again,

you see this looks totally different now.

Now it looks better.

It occupies more space

because of that color, which we added in there,

which automatically in the end tells Flutter

to reserve more space for it.

We got the padding around the text field.

And of course, most importantly, we got the text field.

We got the text field with that label that we set,

and with a hint related to the max characters we set.

And of course, we can tap into it

and this soft keyboard should open up here,

and we can use that to type or here when using the emulator,

we thankfully can also use our physical keyboard

to enter our title.

So that's how we could enter a value here.

Of course, at the moment, we're not using

that value in any way, and we also can't submit the form.

So therefore, before we add any other input fields,

let's make sure that we do instead save that entered value

and that we can submit that form

and add a new expense with that title.

Transcript
So, back here in new_expense,

let's make sure that we store the data entered by the user

and we then also use that data when the form is submitted,

so when this input field is submitted in the end.

And for that, of course,

we'll also need a button that allows us to submit this.

Now, first things first.

I wanna start with storing the value entered by the user.

And when it comes to storing that value,

we got two main approaches for doing that.

The first approach is to add another parameter

to the text field,

and that would be the onChanged parameter,

which allows us to register a function

that will be triggered

whenever the value in that text field changes.

For example, because the user pressed a key.

And onChanged wants a function

that will receive a String value

and that string value that's received

will be the value entered into the text field.

So, therefore, we could add a method here

to NewExpense State, a method that returns nothing,

and could be called _saveTitlIinput.

And here, we get our inputValue,

which is of type string, as mentioned before.

And now we can pass saveTitleInput as a value to onChanged

like this, not executing it, just pointing at it.

With that, we have to remove const though,

since we're setting this function

as a value for unchanged now.

We could add it here in front of input decoration.

And inside of saveTitleInput,

we can now use that inputValue,

which is passed in automatically by Flutter

whenever it calls this function,

which, as mentioned,

it does whenever the value in the text field changes.

And we could now add a variable to our state here,

enteredTitle, or _enteredTitle,

which initially is an empty string,

because initially nothing has been entered.

But now here, whenever this is triggered,

we can set _enteredTitle

equal to the entered inputValue, like this.

We don't need to wrap this with setState here,

because I'm actually not using entered value

anywhere in my UI code.

So, the UI doesn't need to update

just because I am storing

the value entered by the user in some variable.

Instead, I'm storing that value in some variable

so that we can use that variable

with that stored latest value entered by the user

when the user submits the input.

And for that, we need to add a button

that allows the user to submit the input.

So, after the text field,

still inside of the column, of course,

I wanna add my buttons.

And for that, I'll add a row here

since I'll have more than one button eventually,

which takes multiple child widgets, of course.

And for the moment here,

I'm only interested in adding one button here,

an ElevatedButton, let's say,

on which we have to set the onPressed argument

pointing at a function

that should be triggered when the button is pressed,

and then the child widget

that contains the content of the button.

So, for example here, a text that says Save Expense,

and this text here can of course, be a const value.

And then onPressed, we now wanna use this entered title

to add a new expense.

Now, we'll do this eventually.

At the moment, I'll simply print this entered title

to see whether A, this code is executed,

and B, we get access to that latest value that was entered.

It should work because we're saving the latest value here

on every keystroke in enteredTitle,

so therefore, we should have the latest value

entered by the user stored in that variable.

And therefore, if we then,

at a later point of time, reference this variable here,

when this button is pressed,

we should be able to print that latest entered value.

So, with that, if you save that

and maybe force a reload,

you should be able to enter some text here like test,

and click Save Expense.

And if you now go back

and you open this panel here

in Visual Studio Code

and you dare go to the DEBUG CONSOLE,

you should see this Test value somewhere there,

or whichever text you entered into your input field.

So, this works.

We do have access to the enteredTitle,

and that's one way of getting hold of that value.

Transcript
So reacting to every key press

and updating and storing the current value of the text field

in some variable

is one way of handling and storing the user input.

But of course, it can be a bit cumbersome

to manually store all the input

for all the text fields

that might make up your user interface.

And that's why Flutter gives you a convenient alternative.

Nonetheless, it's also important

to know about this approach

because it's also a valid approach

that you might see in many projects you're working on.

But the alternative you get

does not require you to add this function

and this extra storage variable.

Instead, we'll add another property,

which can be a final property now

to this NewExpenseState class.

And this is a property

that could be called titleController.

Now, the name might be a bit strange,

and of course it is up to you,

but I chose titleController here

because the value which will be stored in this property

will be an object that is created

with help of the built-in TextEditingController class,

which is a class provided by Flutter.

Now, this creates an object

that's optimized for handling user input, you could say,

an object that can be passed as a value to text field

to let flutter do all the heavy lifting

of storing the entered value and so on.

Now, when using TextEditingController,

there's one thing that's really important

to keep in mind though.

When you create a TextEditingController here,

you also have to tell Flutter to delete that controller

when the widget is not needed anymore,

so for example, when the modal overlay is closed,

because otherwise this TextEditingController

which you create here

would live on in memory

even though the widget is not visible anymore.

That's why when using TextEditingController,

you should also always add the special dispose method

to your state class here.

So a method called dispose,

which returns nothing,

and calls super.dispose.

And before calling super.dispose,

you should reach out to your controller,

and on that controller,

call the dispose method,

so that you tell Flutter

that this controller is not needed anymore.

Otherwise it will not be deleted,

and ultimately your device memory

might be taken up by all these unnecessary controllers,

and that could cause your app to crash.

So therefore, you should always dispose

of these TextEditingControllers

you might be creating.

But what's the idea behind this controller now?

Well, with it created,

you can go to your text field

and get rid of this onChanged parameter,

which you now don't need anymore.

And instead you can set a controller parameter.

And you set that to the controller

that should be responsible for this text field.

So if you have multiple fields,

you need multiple controllers.

And you can now also use this titleController here

in the function that's triggered

when this button is pressed.

Here, you can access your titleController,

and then on that object,

you will have a text property,

which, as you might guess,

simply contains the text

the user entered into the input field.

And therefore you don't have to manually take care

about storing that input.

Instead, Flutter does it for you.

And with that, of course,

if we go back and reopen this

and enter Test or Test 2,

and click Save Expense,

and we go back to that debug console,

we now see that output here in the console.

And that's therefore the approach

we'll use in this section now.

And therefore, since it's a bit less work to do

and we will add more text fields

and I don't want to manually manage all the inputs,

I will use this controller approach in this section here.



Transcript
So now that we have a basic understanding

of how we can add text fields,

here's a little exercise for you, a small challenge for you.

I want you to add another text field to this column

in a separate row.

And that text field should allow the user

to enter an amount, so the amount that belongs

to the expense that is about to be created.

For that, of course, you wanna make sure

that you use a soft keyboard type that's optimized

for entering numbers.

You wanna add an appropriate label to this new text field.

And of course, you also should make sure

that the value entered by the user is stored

and is also printed here down here in this button.

And speaking of buttons, I also want you

to add another button to this row of buttons here,

a text button which allows the user to cancel editing

and which will use in the future

to close this modal overlay.

Now, you don't need to add the logic for closing just yet

because you haven't learned how to do that,

but definitely add the button and add that text field

and therefore practice what we learned.

Transcript
So did you succeed?

Let's now try it together.

For that, I'll, first of all, copy that TextField,

which we had here for the title,

and adjust it for my amount here

by replacing the text with the text amount.

The maxLength is actually not needed anymore,

but I'll set the keyboardType parameter,

which I showed you before,

to input type, or TextInputType.number like this.

And of course, I also want to create

a new controller here,

an _amountController,

which is also a TextEditingController,

and which also must be removed

when we remove this widget.

So here in this dispose method,

which is called automatically by Flutter

when the widget is destroyed,

I will use my _amountController

and call dispose on that.

Like this.

And with that, Flutter will manage that value for us,

at least as soon as we assign the _amountController here

as a value for controller on the TextField.

And we can then use it here on this button down there

to also output the _amountController.text.

Now please note that this will indeed be text.

So a string value, even though a number is entered,

if we want to treat it as a number

and use it as a number,

we'll have to convert it manually, thereafter.

But that's something we'll do later.

For the moment, I'll just output it here.

And I also wanna make sure that this second button,

which I mentioned, is shown here.

And this will be a TextButton,

where on press I currently won't do anything.

I just add an empty anonymous function here.

And as a child, I'll set the text

which should be displayed.

And here that's simply 'Cancel,'

which can be a constant piece of text.

Now with that, we added the two things

that should be added for this task.

There's now just one additional thing

I want to do to this TextField,

to this amount TextField,

which was not part of the task.

So you're done, you're good.

But there's one thing I wanna do.

In this InputDecoration object here,

I wanna set the prefixText property here

to a dollar sign.

And since this is this special character

with this special meaning,

I'll escape it by adding this backward slash

in front of it.

And I'm doing this here, followed by a wide space

so that we always have this dollar sign

in front of the amount field

because, well in the end, it is a dollar amount

that should be entered here.

So that's some additional configuration

to make sure that we tell the user

which kind of value they are about to enter.

With that, if we save this and we force a reload,

if we open this modal overlay,

we got these two buttons here at the bottom.

That's great.

The Cancel button, of course, doesn't do anything,

but we'll change this soon.

But if I enter a value here in the title

and here in the amount, that both works.

And you also see how the keyboard changes

because of this keyboardType

that we set here on the second input field.

We get this number optimized keyboard here,

and we can, therefore, enter a number.

If we now click Save Expense here,

this should both be stored.

And indeed, if we take a look at the debug console,

we can see both values here.

So that's how we can add a number input field here.

Transcript
Now, being able to enter

all these values is great,

but let's make sure that now this cancel button also closes

this modal overlay when tapped.

And to achieve this, we have to go to this function here,

which is assigned to this cancel button.

And of course, we could also convert this into a method

that belongs to this class, and then just point at it.

But here, I'll work with this anonymous function,

just like that.

But inside of this function,

we now want to use another built in class

provided by Flutter, the Navigator class,

which we'll see, again, a little bit later in the course,

once we dive deeper into navigation

and how we can switch between different screens.

And this navigator class has a pop method,

which we can execute,

which wants the current context as an argument.

So this context value,

which we get automatically here in this build method.

So this is passed in by Flutter,

and we have to kind of forward it to the pop method.

And pop simply removes this overlay from the screen.

So if we save that

and I click cancel, you see the overlay closes.

So that's pretty good.

The next step now is to make sure

that this text field widget here

doesn't take up its entire row,

but that it instead sits next to another

input-like element, not a text field actually,

but some other widget, which we will kind

of treat like an input element,

that then allows us

to select a date that should be attached to this expense.

Transcript
So it's time to add a date input, so to say.

And for that, I'll add a row widget here

below this first TextField

because this amount TextField

actually doesn't need an entire row.

The amount is typically pretty short.

We don't need to use the entire row here.

Instead, I wanna use a part of that row

and the other part should be used by the date input.

So therefore here, this row takes its children parameter

and the first child that's added here is the text field.

The second child after the text field

will be that date input.

But here, we don't have a built-in input that we could use.

Instead, we kind of have to build our own input here.

But thankfully, as you'll see,

that will be quite straightforward.

No worries.

To add this date input here,

I'll start by adding a SizedBox here

to add some spacing

between this amount TextField and that date input,

let's say 16 pixels.

And then next to that,

another row which I wanna use

to group two other widgets,

which then together form the date input together.

And since we here have a Row inside of a Row

and that would cause problems,

we should already wrap this with Expanded,

and we will actually have to do the same for the TextField

because TextField turns out to be a widget

which has problems

with being placed in a Row like this

because it also wants to take

as much space horizontally as possible,

and the Row by default

doesn't restrict the amount of space that can be taken,

and that therefore causes problems

when Flutter tries to render this combination on the screen.

Hence, we also should wrap TextField with Expanded

to make sure that it takes as much space

as it can get on the screen, but nothing more.

So we need to wrap this around TextField

and also around Row here.

With that, inside of this inner Row,

I want to have a Text widget,

which we'll use to show the currently selected date,

so for the moment I'll just say Selected Date here

as a placeholder.

And after this text field here,

I want to display an IconButton,

which can be pressed to open a date picker,

so an overlay that can be used for selecting a date.

This IconButton here needs an icon.

And for this, we can create a new const Icon here

with Icons.calendar_month,

which is a fitting icon I want to use here.

And in addition to setting the Icon,

of course, I also wanna set onPressed

to make sure that I register a function

that will be triggered when this Icon button is pressed.

And I'll get back to that function logic in just a second.

With all that though, if you save that and force a reload

and you click this Add button,

you should see something like that.

It's not 100% finished yet,

but you see that the amount

and this date input combination here sit in the same row

and take up an equal amount of space here.

Now, indeed here for the date inputs,

it would be nice if they would be pushed

all the way to the right here.

And to achieve this,

we can go to this Row

that contains this Text and Icon button,

and there we can set the mainAxisAlignment,

which in a row controls the horizontal alignment,

and set this to MainAxisAlignment.end

to push the content to the end of the row like this.

We can also add

the crossAxisAlignment

and set this to CrossAxisAlignment.center

to center the content vertically.

Now, if you want to do that or not

is something that's up to you,

but you can do that as well.

With that, I do have the basic user interface

I wanna have here,

and we now of course have to make sure

that when we press this calendar icon button here,

we actually do open such a date picker

that allows the user to pick a date.

For that, we have to work on that function

that's passed as a value to onPressed

on this date icon button.

And I'll set this function up

as a separate method here in my state class.

It does not matter if you define it in front

or after this dispose method here.

Here, I'll define it in front of it,

and I'll name it _presentDatePicker,

because that is what we do in this method here.

We want to show that date picker.

Now, the other, it's this _presentDatePicker method

that should be used as a value for this IconButton here.

So this anonymous function can be replaced

with a pointer at this _presentDatePicker function here.

And inside of this function

or inside of this method to be precise,

we now wanna show such a date picker.

And this can be done

by using Flutter's showDatePicker method.

Now, before in the expenses.dart file,

you already saw showModalBottomSheet,

which was a built-in function.

Now, you see showDatePicker,

which is another built-in function supported by Flutter.

Just like showModalBottomSheet,

which wanted a context,

showDatePicker also wants a context.

But in addition, it also needs an initialDate,

so basically the date

that is selected initially when the picker is opened,

then the firstDate that can be selected,

so the lowest possible date, so to say,

and the lastDate,

so the maximum date that can be selected.

Now, to get all these dates,

I'll create a new helper variable

or a final helper variable to be precise,

which I'll call now, which is simply DateTime.now,

and this should be my initialDate.

So my initialDate is simply today,

created with DateTime.now

because initialDate, just like firstDate and lastDate,

all want DateTime values.

So therefore, here I created a DateTime

and used this as an initialDate.

For the firstDate,

I then want to create a new DateTime

by calling the DateTime constructor function like this,

and by now manually passing a year, month, and day to it.

And for the year, I want to use now.year.

So on this DateTime object,

which now is since we created it

with this DateTime constructor,

you can access various pieces of information

with help of all these properties.

For example, the year property

to get the year of the date here,

so of the now date,

so the current year, therefore,

and I wanna deduct 1 from it by using this - operator.

So this gives me the current year - 1.

Then the next value you have to set here

on the DateTime constructor function is the month.

And here I'll use now.month,

so the same month but one year ago.

And the last value I want to set is now.day,

so the day of this date here.

So basically, I'm setting the firstDate to today

minus 1 year.

And for the lastDate,

I will now simply use now again, so today,

so that my initialDate

and the last possible date I can set is now,

but the first possible date,

the oldest date that can be set is now minus one year.

And with that, if you save everything

and you force a reload,

you should be able to open this overlay

and click this date picker button here,

and now you get this date picker overlay

presented on the screen,

and here you can navigate between years

and the different months in a year

and then pick any date of your choice and confirm this.

And of course, at the moment we're not doing anything

with that confirmed value,

but that's how we can show the picker.

But of course, now we also wanna store that picked date.

Transcript
So, how can we now store

that date that was selected?

Well, showDatePicker in the end returns that picked date,

but wrapped into a so-called future,

a value of type Future,

which we haven't encountered thus far.

Now, futures are a very important data type built into Dart.

You will see futures again later in the course

when we work with HTTP requests,

and the future simply is an object from the future,

you could say.

It simply is an object that wraps a value

which you don't have yet,

but which you will have in the future.

Like here for showDatePicker,

when this line of code is executed by Flutter,

it opens this date picker and shows it on the screen.

But of course, no date has been picked yet.

That will only happen in the future, you could say.

Therefore, Flutter internally

basically memorizes that in the future

some value will be picked here

and it allows you to register a function

that should be executed in that future

once that value is available.

And that function can be registered

by calling a method on that object,

on that future object that is returned by showDatePicker.

So, this future object,

and that's important to understand,

is returned immediately,

but it doesn't contain the picked value yet.

Instead, this future object gives you a then method,

which you can call,

to which you can pass a function,

an anonymous function, for example,

which then will get that value,

which in this case here has been picked

once it has been picked.

So this function which you pass to then

will be executed by Flutter once the value is available,

so once a date has been picked here.

It's kind of similar to how buttons work,

where we also define a function

that will be executed in the future,

but here we're dealing with a widget

where we set this function

as a value for one of the many widget arguments.

In case of showDatePicker,

we instead get such a future object

to which we pass such a function,

but the idea is generally the same,

that we wanna get hold of some value

or some event in the future.

Now, using such a then method

is a one way of getting hold of that value.

A more convenient method

is to add the special async keyword

here between the parentheses after the method name,

before the opening curly brace,

and then add the await keyword in front of the code

that does yield such a future.

So you can't use async await here in the build method

for your widgets,

but you can use it

whenever you get such a future value.

If you use await here,

you get access to that pickedDate in this case here

as a value in a regular variable.

But even though this now looks like all the other code

or almost like all the other code,

the await keyword internally simply tells Flutter

that this value that should be stored in pickedDate

won't be available immediately,

but at least at some point in the future,

and Flutter should therefore basically wait for that value

before it stores it in that variable.

Nonetheless, Flutter will make sure

that the next line after this code here,

so this line here,

will only be executed once the value is available.

So it will really kind of wait for that value,

and therefore here we could print that pickedDate,

or we could store it in a variable,

possibly even with setState

so that we could output it here

in this Text next to this IconButton.

And that is indeed what I wanna do here.

So I'll add a new variable here,

_selectedDate,

which should be of type DateTime.

And since I am setting a type here,

the var keyword must be omitted.

And actually it initially will not hold a value,

hence it should be DateTime? to tell Flutter

that selectedDate either stores a value of type DateTime,

or nothing, null as it's called in Dart.

And instead of _presentDatePicker

here after waiting for the _selectedDate,

we can call setState

and set _selectedDate = pickedDate.

And pickedDate is of type DateTime,

so setting it like this is fine.

And with that, we can use this _selectedDate

to output it down there.

Of course, here I again want to output a version

that's human readable.

And for that reason,

I'll use the same approach I used before

in my expense model

where I use this intel package

and such a formatter

by adding it here

to this new_expense.dart file as well.

And this formatter can be set up outside of any class.

Alternatively, we could of course also simply import

from our own package here.

So from our own project package

and there from the expense.dart file in the models folder

because in there we set up this formatter,

so it is actually available

as soon as we import from this file.

And we can use this formatter down there

to not output _selectedDate here,

but instead, I want to output No date selected

if we haven't selected a date yet,

so I want to check if _selectedDate

is equal to null,

and then we can use a ternary expression here

to output No date selected in that case.

Or alternatively, we can use the formatter here

and call format on the _selectedDate

to output a formatted version of that date,

and now we have to remove the const keyword here.

Now, I'm getting an error here

that in the end DateTime might be null here

and format wants a DateTime that can't be null,

there is no question mark after DateTime here.

Of course, we know that _selectedDate

won't be null here though

because we're checking this here,

and therefore we can add an exclamation mark at the end

to basically force Dart to assume that this won't be null.

So with an exclamation mark

after a possibly null value,

we tell Dart that this will never be null,

which we know with certainty here

because we're checking for null in quality here.

So with that, with all of that out of the way,

we can save this.

And if we go back to our application

and we pick a date here,

we can see that formatted picked date here.

And of course, we can also change that date

and it would update here.

So that's now working as it should,

and we can therefore now as a next step

work on that category selection dropdown.

Transcript
So it's now really time

to finalize this format,

this overall overlay here.

For that, here in this last row

where I have these two buttons,

I also want to add a third button, a dropdown button

that can be used to select a category.

So therefore, here in this row next to the buttons,

I'll add this dropdown button widget,

which is offered by flutter, which renders a button

that will display a dropdown once clicked.

Now this dropdown button widget then has two arguments

that must be set.

The onchanged argument, the onchanged parameter as always

for these buttons, must be set to a function

that should be executed when the button is pressed.

Though here it really is a function that will get a value

of type dynamic

because the value

that it will get here will simply be the value

that has been selected from the dropdown.

And it's of type dynamic

because flutter, right now, does not know which kind

of items will display in this dropdown

because that's the next part.

Items now wants a list

of dropdown menu item values.

Now in this app here, I of course simply want

to display all these possible categories

in this dropdown menu.

And for that we can reach out to our category enum,

which is available because we're importing

this expense dart file in which this enum is defined.

And on that enum,

you can not just access the different values

that you defined, but actually also a values property.

So a property named values, which gives you a list

with all the values that make up the enum.

And that's what we need here

because we wanna display all these values in

this dropdown list.

Now, values is a list of enum values, a list of categories,

therefore, and items, once a list of dropdown menu items.

Therefore, we have to do something we did

before in the course already.

We have to call map on this list

to transform it from one type

of value into another type of value.

Now map, as you learn before in the course, wants a function

which will be executed automatically by dart

for every list item.

And we will get the list item

for which the function is currently executed

as a input value automatically passed in by dart.

So here it will be a single category

since this function will be invoked

for all the category items.

And we wanna return our dropdown menu item here.

So dropdown menu item, that's what we wanna return here.

Now, dropdown menu item in the end is a widget,

and it is a widget where we have to set the child parameter

to another widget, which simply defines

what will be shown on the screen.

And here, I'll keep this simple

and simply output a text widget here.

And the text value should be this category,

but category of course is of type category,

so our enum type here.

And to convert this to a string that can be output

with the text widget, we have

to access the special name property that's made available

by dart, along with a couple

of other properties on all those enum keys,

all those enum items.

And name, then, has a two string method, which we can call

to convert these enum type values here,

two strings that can be used with the text widget here.

So the values property on the enum itself was

a property provided by dart,

and the name property on the individual enum items is

another property provided by dart.

Now here, we're still getting an error in the end

that we have an iterable here in a place

where a list is expected, and therefore,

we should do something we did

before in the course as well.

We should call to list on the result of map.

But, this is actually not all I want to do here.

Instead on this dropdown menu item,

I don't just wanna set the child,

but in addition to that, also the value parameter.

And this will be the value that will be stored internally

for every dropdown item.

It'll not be visible to the user, it's this child

that's visible to the user, but it will be stored internally

and it will be this value

that we get here in this onchanged function

whenever the user selects one of these dropdown items.

And here the value is the category itself.

So the specific enum item that is mapped

to a specific dropdown menu item.

So therefore here in onchanged, flutter now understands

that the value we will get here will actually be

of type category.

It will be one of these enum items.

And then we can use this here.

And for the moment, I'll just print it.

Of course, in the future we'll do something else with it.

But with that, if we save everything

and force a reload, if we open this,

we have this dropdown button here,

and in there, we find our different items.

Though, as you see, when I select them,

we actually don't see them here.

We also have no initially selected item,

and they're also all written in lowercase.

So there are a couple of things we have to do here.

And the first thing is to get rid of to string.

We actually wouldn't even need that

because name is already a string,

but I wanna replace it instead with to uppercase,

because this is a built-in method

that can be called on strings that transforms a string

to be all uppercase.

So that's the first step we should take.

In addition, I now wanna store the value that was selected

because just to quickly show you this, if you do go

to the debug console,

you can indeed see the different selected values there.

So printing worked and selected worked,

but I also wanna store the values now so

that we can later use them when our form is submitted.

And for that, we can't use a controller.

Dropdown button does not support a controller,

but we can of course manage this manually

by adding another new variable

to our new expense state clause just

as we added selected date there to manage it manually.

And here, the value will be of type category, of course,

and I'll name this selected category.

And initially I'll set it to category leisure.

So that's the selected category variable.

And now, of course, this should be updated

whenever a new value is selected,

so with help of onchanged here.

Alternatively, we could also create a new separate method at

which we point here, but here I'll do it just in place

and call set state

to set selected category equal to value.

Now, value could be null.

It has this question mark here,

and that's the problem dart has with this code here

because maybe the user didn't select anything.

And therefore I'll add a little if check

and check if value is equal to null.

And if that's the case, I will simply return.

And we can do this outside of set state, actually, so

that this code here only executes if the value is not null.

Because if we return in a function,

no code thereafter will be executed.

A return statement is always the last code

that will be executed.

So therefore, if we return here, if the value is null,

this code won't be executed.

And on the other hand, if this code will be executed,

we know that the value will never be null,

and dart now also understands this and no longer complains.

So now that we're storing selected category

and we're updating the state whenever it changes,

we can also tweak this dropdown button

and actually add the value parameter to it

and set this to selected category.

And with that, we ensure

that the currently selected value will be shown

on the screen instead of showing this empty dropdown

as it was the case before.

With that, if you save that

and force a reload again, now you see

that leisure is selected initially.

And if I switch to a different category,

that is shown on the screen instead.

And you also see that it's all written uppercase

as mentioned before.

So that's looking really good now.

And therefore,

there are now just some tiny adjustments left.

For example, I want to add a spacer

between my dropdown button

and the other buttons, a const spacer, to make sure

that there is some spacing between all these buttons.

And I also wanna have some spacing to the top, so some space

between the amount input

and this dropdown, for example, some vertical space.

And for that, of course, we can go to this place here

before we start that row that contains the dropdown button,

and here add a sized box, a const sized box

with a height of 16, for example,

so that we have some distance here.

Now, with that, we made good progress.

We're almost done here, but not entirely yet, user.

I of course wanna make sure that if we try

to save some empty input fields, we fail,

and we show the user some error message that tells the user

that valid input values have to be entered first.

And of course thereafter, I also wanna make sure

that this list is updated

and the new expense is added to the list

before we then thereafter take care about styling

and the chart.

And last but not least, related to this form here

or to this overlay.

Of course, if you tap into one of these fields, you see

that the keyboard is coming very close

to these input fields,

and it might actually obscure these input fields

on some devices.

So we also wanna make sure that that will never be the case.

But we'll start with validation.

Transcript
So let's make sure we also validate

those user inputs when submitting them.

And for that, to achieve this, I'll first

of all add a new method here to NewExpense state.

And this could be named submitForm

or submitExpenseData, something like this.

And it should be triggered

whenever this button at the bottom here is pressed,

this one here.

Here, instead of printing some dummy values,

I want to trigger submitExpenseData by pointing at it.

And inside of submitExpenseData, we now have

to validate the data selected by the user.

For that we can use a if statement about which we learned

before in the course already

and check if titleController.text

after trimming it, which is a built-in method

that simply removes excess white space

at the beginning or end.

If this is then empty

and isEmpty is a built-in property

just as trim is a built-in method.

Trim can be called on strings and text is a string

and isEmpty can be called on lists and strings.

And the result of calling trim is a string,

which is why we can use isEmpty here.

So this overall will be true if we have an empty title

or just a bunch of blanks.

And if that's the case, then we wanna show an error message,

which we'll do soon.

But of course that's not the only case when we wanna show

an error message.

Instead, we also wanna show an error message if we have

an invalid amount.

Now the amount is not just invalid if it's empty,

but also if it, for example, is a text that doesn't qualify

as a number or if it's a number smaller than zero

because our amounts

for the expenses here must be greater than zero.

Therefore, as a first step, we have

to transform the amountController.text, which we get,

which is always a string, to a number.

So our enteredAmount as we could call it,

has to be a number, not a string.

And this transformation can be achieved

by using double.tryParse, a method built into Dart.

tryParse takes a string as an input

and then returns a double if it is able to convert

that string to a number, to a double

or it returns null if it's not able to convert it.

So using tryParse on a text like 'Hello'

Would yield null.

For example, tryParse on something like 1.12

as a string would yield 1.12

as a double, as a number.

So that's something we have to do here.

And with that done, we can add another variable,

which could be called amountIsInvalid,

which we wanna set equal to true or false, so to a Boolean.

But of course we don't wanna hard code true or false here.

Instead that should be derived dynamically

by taking a look at enteredAmount.

Just as we're taking a look at the title text here.

So what we wanna check here is whether enteredAmount

is maybe equal to null

because I just mentioned tryParse will yield null

if an invalid number was entered.

So some text that can't be converted to a number.

So now amountIsInvalid will be true

if enteredAmount is null

because indeed then the amount is invalid.

But that's not the only case in which we would consider it

invalid in this app here.

Instead, the amount will also be invalid

if it's smaller than zero as mentioned.

So here we actually wanna derive true or false

based on a combination of conditions.

And in Dart, you can do this

with two very important operators.

The logical and operator, which is written like this

with two ampersand symbols, or the logical

or operator which is written like this

with two pipe symbols.

And you will see this in many other programming

languages as well.

Of course thus far you already saw some operators like plus

or minus, which are used in mathematical operations.

There also would be the asterisk operator for multiplication

or the forward slash operator for division.

But where plus and minus

and so on are used to derive numbers,

and and or are used to derive Booleans.

And they help us derive Booleans

by combining multiple conditions.

Here, the first condition is that enteredAmount is equal

to null, in that case amountIsInvalid will be true,

or it should also be true if enteredAmount

is smaller or equal than zero.

So if one of these two conditions is met,

amountIsInvalid, will be true.

If both conditions are false, amountIsInvalid is false,

but it is enough that one of them is met

to set amountIsInvalid to true

because of this logical or operator.

Well, and with that, we now know when

amountIsInvalid will be true.

We can now add this here to our if condition

where we're checking whether the title is invalid

with this code.

Now we wanna combine this condition with amountIsInvalid

by again using the or operator, the or operator instead

of the and operator

because we wanna make it into this if block

where we wanna show an error message in the future

if at least one of our checks yields through.

Because even if all the input values are valid, it's enough

for one input value to be invalid to show an error message

because we need all input values to be valid,

not most of them.

So therefore here we want to now add amountIsInvalid.

And this is now of course not a condition,

but it is a value that contains true or false.

And that's all the if statement wants.

It wants a bunch of true or false values

or expressions that yield true

or false to know whether the code inside

of the if statement should be executed or not.

So we spent quite some time on this if statement already,

but it is important to understand how if statements work

and how these conditions work and how they can be combined.

And we're of course also still not done

because the date could of course also be invalid.

Therefore, we want to add another condition here again

with the or operator for the reasons mentioned before.

And here we wanna check if selectedDate is equal to null

because if that is null,

which it can be if no date has been selected,

then we also wanna show an error message.

We don't need to check the selectedCategory

because here we have a default category.

So here it should not be possible to set this to no value,

but for the other values it would be possible.

And that's why we're checking them here.

Well, and now we can make sure

that we show an error message in this if statement.

Transcript
So how do we show an error message here?

Of course, it's important to keep in mind

that this message will only be shown

if we make it into this if statement,

which will only be the case if at least

one of these conditions here is met.

Now to show this error message,

we can use another built-in function provided by Flutter,

and this time it will be the showDialog function,

which will show some info or error dialogue on the screen,

some popup on the screen you could say.

ShowDialog, just like showDatePicker

or showModalBottomSheet before wants a context value,

which we set to this context object

that's available in this state class.

And it wants such a builder function,

which should be a function that takes some context

as an input and returns a widget as a value.

And that widget will simply be the content

of that pop-up dialogue that will be shown.

So here we get this context

provided by Flutter automatically

when it executes this builder method.

And the widget I wanna return here

will be one of the built-in dialogue widgets.

Now there are a couple of built-in dialogue widgets

and I'm interested in the alert dialogue,

which is a dialogue styled and optimized

for showing some alert message.

The alert dialogue widget then has a couple of parameters

that can be set.

For example, a title parameter, which wants another widget

where I'll use the text widget

to give this pop-up window a title.

For example, invalid input.

And this can be converted to a constant text.

I'll not convert the overall AlertDialog

because this would soon not be possible anyways.

Because the title is not all that's added here,

instead I also will add some content,

which is the main text,

the main content shown in the dialogue.

And here, I'll create another text widget,

though you could also use other widgets in here,

don't get me wrong,

but here I'll use some simple text and for example, say,

"Please make sure a valid title, amount, date,

and category was entered."

And now last but not least,

we can also set the actions parameter

along with many other parameters, as you can see, of course.

But here it's the actions parameter, which I wanna set,

which allows you to define a bunch of actions,

typically buttons that should be displayed in that dialogue,

which for example, allow the user to close the dialogue,

so to close this popup window.

And here I'll add a simple text button as an action

where onPressed, of course, must be set

to an anonymous function here where I then actually want

to close this dialogue by again using navigator.pop

as we did it before for the modal bottom sheet

and the pop method wants the context.

In this case, the context connected to this dialogue,

so this CTX value,

which is passed into this function here

automatically by Flutter.

And besides setting onPressed,

I of course also set my child here,

the main content of this button.

And here I'll set this to a text widget

where I simply say okay,

and turn this into a constant text.

And with that, we're showing this error dialogue.

Now, as a last step, I just also want to return

after showing this dialogue because as mentioned before,

whenever you return in a function,

you make sure that no code thereafter

in that function gets executed.

So here I'm returning after calling showDialog,

but still inside of this if statement,

so that any code I add thereafter

won't be executed if we made it into this if statement.

Because if we make it in there,

I just wanna show this dialogue and then do nothing else.

I don't want to continue because soon when we continue,

we will use the entered data and create a new expense.

And that, of course, should not happen

if invalid data has been entered.

So with all that out of the way,

if we save this and force a reload, if I open this

and I enter nothing, I get this error dialogue,

which I can close of course, but I get it

whenever I try to submit invalid data.

And that therefore, of course, works exactly as it should.

Now, as a next step, we can make sure

that if valid data was entered,

we use that data to update this list.

And this is actually something which you can try on your own

because this is actually something

which we basically already did in this course.

Of course not in this exact app, but the pattern,

the approach you need here is one we already used before,

but of course in the next lecture,

we'll also implement it together.

Transcript
So did you succeed adding

the expense that is created here

to this list of expenses?

Let's do it together now.

And for this we have to go to Expenses Dart

because that's where we manage this list of expenses.

And in here we can add a new method

that could be called addExpense

because that's in the end what we want to do.

And here in the end, I expect to get an expense value

that should be of type Expense.

So using our custom class here as a type.

And then here I wanna reach out to registeredExpenses

and call the built-in add method, which is

provided by Dart, on all lists,

to add a new item to the list.

And of course, here I want to add this expense as a item.

Of course, that's not all I wanna do though.

Instead this should be done inside of setState like this

to make sure that the UI is updated

so that the updated list is output here with help

of ExpensesList.

But that is all we have to do to add a NewExpense, though

of course, at the moment, addExpense is never executed.

Now it should be executed from

inside this NewExpense widget here.

And to do that, we have to go to that widget

and there add a new property, a new property

that will actually store a function as a value

as we already did it in our course sections

where you learned about this pattern of accepting functions

as the values in your own widgets.

And this should be a function that returns nothing

but actually provides an expense value.

And the property could be named onAddExpense.

And I choose this naming pattern to make it clear

that this in the end, will contain a function

that should be executed when a certain event occurs.

In this case, when this form is submitted.

Of course here,

we then also have to accept this argument,

this named parameter,

and I'll use that same name by using this this shortcut,

and I'll require it

because this widget won't work if we don't

provide this function.

So with that, we've got onAddExpense in our

NewExpense widget class.

But of course we needed inside

of this NewExpenseState class, we need it here inside

of submitExpenseData after this if check down here.

But as you also learned

before in this course, you can get access to properties

of the widget class that belongs to your state class

by using the special widget property provided by Flutter.

This is available in classes that extend the state class

as we're doing it here.

And this simply gives you access

to the connected widget class.

And therefore we can also get access

to this onAddExpense function property

and execute it as a function here because it is a function

and pass our expense to it.

And for this, we create a NewExpense here where we have

to set title, amount, and so on.

And the title of course is the value stored in

_titleController.text.

So this value here, that's what we assign here as a value

for title.

For the amount, we use this entered amount,

which I'm extracting here.

So this parsed text, which we validated.

So at this point down there, we know that it's valid,

otherwise we wouldn't have reached that code

because this return statement would've made sure

that we don't get there if one

of these values would've been invalid.

The date is the selected date, of course.

And here we get an error

because Dart thinks that it could be null,

but we know that it won't be null down there thanks

to our validation.

Hence, we can add an exclamation mark to tell Dart

that we're sure that this won't be null.

And the category here is of course, the selectedCategory.

And with that we're creating our expense

and we're passing that expense as a value to onAddExpense

and therefore indirectly to addExpense.

And now we just need to make sure

that this addExpense function is passed as a value

to NewExpense.

So therefore here we simply have to refer to addExpense.

Now with that, we just have to remove const here.

And this of course is also not a positional argument,

but instead the value that should be set for onAddExpense.

So this named onAddExpense parameter.

And with that, we're passing this addExpense function

as a value to NewExpense

so that it can be executed from inside there.

And if we now save that all, and we try this

and enter some values here

and select a date, and then also pick a value here

and save this, we can close this.

We'll have to make sure that it closes automatically soon,

but we can close it manually for now.

And we see our NewExpense here

with all the data we entered in our input fields.

Now with that, we're able to submit our data

after validating it and we can add a new expense.

But of course, now as a next step, I wanna make sure

that this overlay actually closes

after we submitted the valid data.

And I wanna make sure that this keyboard, which opens up

as we tap into these input fields,

doesn't possibly obscure any buttons or anything like that.

So that's what we'll work on next.

Transcript
Now let's start by making sure

that we actually close this overlay

after a new expense was added.

For that here in new_expense.dart,

after calling onAddExpense,

inside of this _submitExpenseData method still,

we can use the good old Navigator class,

which we saw a couple of times already,

and call the pop method, and pass the context to it,

this context property that's managed

by Fluter in this state object here,

to make sure that the overlay is closed,

because of course we wanna do that

after adding a new expense.

Now to make sure that this keyboard

that opens up doesn't overlap our inputs

we have to go to the place where we open

this modal bottom sheet,

and there is set one new parameter, isScrollControlled,

and set this to true.

When you set this to true,

the modal overlay will actually take the full available

height and therefore ensure that, of course, now

we don't overlap any inputs.

Of course, you can see, though, that at the moment

this also means that some content is obscured

by some device features like the camera here.

And to make sure that this is not the case,

we can go back to the new_expense dart file.

And here where we add some padding around our form,

we can switch from all to fromLTRB, which simply allows us

to set different spacings for different directions.

left top, right, and bottom.

And set all these values to 16 except for the second one,

which is the one to the top, as you can see here.

And we could set this to 48,

which should be enough no matter on which device

you are working here.

With that things look good here.

So this is now actually how we can make sure

that we never obscure anything here.

Transcript
So, this isn't looking too bad now.

We can now add new expenses here with amount, date,

category and a title.

Those expenses are then added to the list.

Of course, the styling as mentioned, isn't finalized yet.

We'll take care about that soon.

But before we do that,

I wanna make sure that we can also get rid of expenses

by swiping them away.

So by swiping from right to left.

And at the moment, this is not possible,

but it's such a common pattern that Flutter also helps a lot

with implementing this pattern.

So, how can we make sure that these items

can be swiped away?

Well, for that, we can go to our expenses_list

where we have this ListView.builder with our expense items.

And Flutter gives us a special widget,

which we can wrap around list items that should be swipeable

or that should be dismissible, removable to be precise.

And the widget conveniently is named Dismissible, like this.

Now Dismissible wants a child,

and that should be the list item that can be swiped away.

So in my case, my ExpenseItem, but it then also needs a key.

And I mentioned this key before,

it was always this thing which we accepted here

in our constructors and forwarded to the parent widget.

And that was all we had to do with keys thus far.

Now the good news is that in most cases, in most widgets,

that is all you have to do with keys.

There is a good reason why we haven't seen keys

being used anywhere besides registering them here

in our constructors.

But there sometimes are scenarios

where those keys are actually needed

because this key mechanism exists to make widgets

uniquely identifiable.

And I'll dive a bit deeper into all of that

in a later section.

But in the end here,

where we should be able to swipe widgets away

and then remove the data that's associated with a widget,

a key is needed to allow Flutter

to uniquely identify a widget and the data

that's associated with it.

And such a key can be created by using the built-in

ValueKey constructor function.

This creates a key object, which can be used as a value

for this key parameter.

And as mentioned, for most widgets,

you don't need to set any keys,

you don't need to worry about keys at all.

But here for the Dismissible widget,

a key is needed to make sure that the correct data

will be deleted.

So here we must create such a key,

and ValueKey wants an input,

in the end it wants some input that can be used

as a unique identification criteria

or value for the widget to which the key is attached.

And in this case here,

we could simply take our expense identified by index

as a value for ValueKey,

and that's all we have to do regarding that key.

With that, if we add a comma for formatting and save this,

and maybe force a reload,

you will see that you can now swipe those list items

and this then removes them.

Now the connected data is actually not removed,

therefore, if I add a new item here real quick,

a new expense, you will see that I get an error

basically because we have a mismatch

between what's showing on the screen

and which data is still stored internally.

But this is generally how you get this swiping effect.

Now of course, we must make sure that we also do something

when we swiped a widget away.

And for that, you can add the onDismissed parameter,

which allows you to trigger a function

whenever one widget has been swiped away,

so when it has been dismissed.

And here I of course wanna trigger a function

which then removes the associated data

from my list of expenses.

So I wanna update the registeredExpenses list

whenever I swiped one of my expense items away.

Therefore, we should go to the expenses dart file

to the ExpensesState, therefore,

where we also added addExpense before

and add another method here.

And this other method could be called removeExpense

because that is what I want to do here.

And in the end here, I want to get the expense

that should be removed, and we can then call setState here

and reach out to the registeredExpenses.

And there, call remove and pass the expense

that should be removed as a value.

And that should make sure that the expense

is not just removed visually from the screen,

but also internally from that list of expenses

that we managed.

Now in expenses_list, we must accept this function

as an input so that we can call this removeExpense function

from inside this widget.

Therefore, as we did it multiple times before

in this course already, we can add a new property

which actually wants a function that returns nothing,

but that takes an expense as an input,

and that could be called onRemoveExpense here.

And of course, this must be set

when the expenses_list widget is created.

So, we require it and then bind the named

onRemoveExpense parameter to this property.

And therefore, of course, down here,

we can execute this function.

However, we can't point at it like this

because on dismissed actually wants a function as a value

that takes a so-called DismissDirection as an input,

which simply is some information that tells us

whether we swiped from left to right or right to left,

so that you could in theory do different things

depending on how the user swiped.

Now here all simply set us to an anonymous function,

therefore where I get this direction

and I'm not really interested in the direction,

but I still have to accept it here.

And then I can call onRemoveExpense

and then pass my expense as a value to onRemoveExpense,

and basically ignore this direction.

Well, and with that, we just have to make sure

that removeExpense is also passed as a value

to ExpensesList.

So therefore here, we now have to set this newly added

onRemoveExpense named parameter and set it to a pointer

that points at removeExpense, like this.

And with that, if you save that and force a reload,

if I now swipe this away, it's still gone,

but now you will see that as I add a new expense here,

I don't get that error because now the UI is in line

with the internally managed data.

And that's how easy it is to make items

in a list dismissible.

SnackBar Durations
In the next lecture we'll use a widget called "SnackBar".

One important change with the latest version of Flutter - to have it disappear automatically, add persist: false to the SnackBar widget (also see this thread if you're running into issues).

Transcript
So we can now also remove items.

There are two things related to that

that I wanna add to this app now.

For one, it would be nice to have some fallback message here

if we have no expenses at all.

In addition,

I wanna show a little info message at the bottom

whenever we did remove an item,

which also offers us a button,

which we can click to bring back that expense item,

in case we swiped accidentally.

Now, let's start with the easier thing

with showing that fallback message,

instead of showing that list, which would be empty.

To do that, we can use a ternary expression,

or to mix things up, add a new variable here,

which stores a Widget,

which we could name mainContent or anything like this.

And, initially, here, we could use the Center widget

to show some centered text

where we say "No expenses found. Start adding some!"

Something like this.

And this can be a const value here.

And we wanna replace that if we do have expenses.

So here we can add a if check

and check if registeredExpenses isNotEmpty,

another utility property offered by Dart

which we can use on lists

to find out whether a list is not empty.

And if registeredExpenses is not empty,

we wanna overwrite mainContent

and store a different value in that variable instead.

And that different value should be this expenses list here.

So I will grab that list and cut it,

and store that in mainContent instead.

And now it's of course mainContent

that should be output here as a child in this column.

Therefore, here, I see "No expenses found,"

but if I add a new expense here, like 16.99,

and maybe this is TRAVEL,

we see that instead.

So this works.

But now let's work on that message that should be shown

if we dismiss an expense.

To show a message after deleting an expense,

it sounds like it would be a good idea

to go to this removeExpense method,

because that is where we do remove expenses.

And indeed it is here after calling remove,

where I do want to show this info message.

And we can show such a message

by using another feature offered by Flutter.

Besides all these utilities show functions

which Flutter offers here,

it also offers a special object,

which you can use for showing or hiding certain UI elements.

And here, that would be

the ScaffoldMessenger utility object which we want to use.

This ScaffoldMessenger object has a of method,

which we must execute,

which wants a context value,

which as you learned, is available in this class,

which is based on the State class.

Now this then gives us an instance

of this ScaffoldMessenger.

And this ScaffoldMessenger thing

offers us various utility functions and methods

that help us with controlling the user interface,

and showing certain things on that interface.

Most importantly,

we can call showSnackBar to show a so-called snackBar,

which you might have not heard before,

but which in the end is just a info message,

which is shown on the screen.

And showSnackBar wants a SnackBar value.

And this value can be created

by using the built in SnackBar class,

and instantiating this class here.

And SnackBar then needs at least a content

which must be set to a Widget.

And in most cases, this will probably be some plain text.

So here, for example,

we could say "Expense Deleted,"

because that is what we did,

and this can be set to be const.

But there is more that can be configured

about that SnackBar.

For example, it also has a duration parameter

that can be set and that wants a duration value,

a value of Type: Duration,

which can be created with the built-in

Duration constructor function,

so the built-in duration class.

And this then has various parameters that can be set

to define a duration.

For example, we can set it to 3 seconds here.

And this can also be turned into a constant value.

And we can also add an action to our SnackBar.

So not actions, but one single action,

and this must be of type SnackBarAction,

which is created by using

the special SnackBarAction constructor,

so the SnackBarAction class.

And this then has also some configuration items,

some parameters we can set,

like for example, the label, which does not want a widget,

but a plain string.

For example, Undo,

so that we have a button on that info message

that allows us to bring back that deleted expense.

And we then also have to add the onPressed parameter

to define the function that should be executed

if this Undo button is pressed on this SnackBar.

And in here, I then want to call setState to update the UI,

and change registeredExpenses,

and instead of removing something,

here, I wanna add something again.

However, actually not with the add method,

but instead with the insert method,

which also adds an item to a list,

but we add our item to a list at a specific position,

because I of course wanna bring back that expense

that we removed in exactly the same place

where it was before.

Now for that, we first of all need to find out

where this expense was

by getting the expenseIndex,

because insert wants the index

where the element should be added,

and then the element that should be added.

So we first of all need to find out which index

this expense that we removed had,

and for that, of course, before removing it,

we need to get that index.

We can get this by reaching out to registeredExpenses,

and then, there, we have a indexOf method provided by Dart

to which we pass a value.

And, as a result, we'll get the position of that value,

the index of that value in that list.

So it's then this expenseIndex

which is passed as a first value to insert.

And the second value is that expense,

which we deleted before.

It was removed from the list,

we can still access it down here though,

and it will then be brought back into the list.

And that's how we can display such a info message

with such a Undo button.

If you now save that and force a reload

to bring back those dummy items,

you see that if I swipe them away,

I get this info message at the bottom,

and it disappears after three seconds.

But I can also press the Undo button to bring back the item.

And if I force a reload again,

so that I have both items back,

you will also see that if I remove Flutter Course,

which is the first item here,

and I bring back that item,

it's brought back in first place,

because that index was used to insert it in the right place.

I can also remove both items.

And, in that case, we might want to make sure

that the info message that belonged to the item

that was just removed is immediately cleared,

so it's also removed from the screen,

and we show the next info message instead.

Because at the moment, as you can see,

if I remove both items,

we get the first info message,

and only after this one disappears, the next one appears.

This might not be what we want,

and we can make sure that we clear

all existing info messages that we might have on the screen

by using ScaffoldMessenger.of(context).

And there, we can call clearSnackBars,

which removes any snack bars,

so any info messages we might still have on the screen.

Now with that if we saved it, if I remove both,

you see the old message is immediately removed,

and the new one is shown as I remove multiple items.

So that's how we can show those info messages,

and how we can bring back items

if we accidentally removed them.

Flutter & Material 3
If you're working with a recent version of Flutter, it will automatically use the "Material 3" look and settings.

I recorded this course with Material 3 BUT at the time where I did record it, this mode had to be enabled manually by setting useMaterial3 to true when working with themes.

You'll see that in the next lectures.

Since Material 3 is the default now, useMaterial3 no longer needs to be set to true, hence you can and should skip that setting. The rest of the code shown in the lectures remains unchanged though.

Transcript
Now at this point, from a feature point of view,

this app is almost done.

Sure, the chart is still missing,

but we can manage our expenses here.

We can add expenses and delete expenses.

We can undo such a deletion process if we want to.

So that's looking good.

And of course we'll get back to the chart.

But before we do that, it's finally time to come back

to styling this app

and to take a closer look at Flutter's theming mechanism,

which you may use for styling your apps.

Because of course, whilst this app doesn't look super ugly,

it's also not really that appealing visually.

And of course, what we could do

to make it more appealing is we could style the individual

parts manually just

as we did it in other sections in this course.

We could, for example, set up a linear gradient

for the background of our scaffold widget

as we did it in this quiz app we built

earlier in the course.

And we could use techniques like this

to style this app here,

this expense tracker app, if we wanted to.

And of course, there's nothing wrong with this approach,

but it would also be nice if we had one central place in

which we could set up certain styles

and those would then automatically get applied

to certain widgets

or could at least easily be referenced from

inside our different widgets so that we, for example,

don't have to copy

and paste color definitions across

different parts of our app.

And this can be achieved with Flutter's theming system,

which we can set up here in main dart in our material app

widget because this material app widget,

which is this root entry point to our app, so to say,

this root widget

that contains all our other widgets in the end.

This material app widget is the widget you use

for setting up your app's theme.

Because I mentioned before that this app widget does a lot

of behind the things stuff,

but it also gives you some key configuration settings

that you can make here that influence your entire app.

And the theme is one of those settings.

And indeed, at this point here,

I already have a theme set up.

I got theme data set to use material three to make sure

that my app here uses this material three look.

Now, this might not be necessary anymore at the point

of time you are viewing this video

because material three might be the default by then,

but this theme parameter

that can be set on this material app will be useful

nonetheless, because setting up a theme is not just about

switching between the material three or material two looks,

but instead you can use this theming mechanism

to control in detail which color different widgets in your

app will have,

and which colors you want to be able to use in your app,

and which text styles you want to be able to use and so on.

So how can you then customize this theme?

Customizing your applications theme involves setting this

theme parameter here on the material app

as we're already doing it.

And theme wants a theme data object, which can be created

with this theme data class provided by Flutter.

Now, when instantiating this theme data class,

you get many parameters that you can set

to fine tune your app's theme.

And this can be super overwhelming.

And I will also say

that Flutter's theming system,

whilst being quite powerful and flexible,

also evolved a lot over time

and therefore this theme data class here also allows you

to set a lot of parameters which still work

but shouldn't be used anymore

because they might be removed in the future

and there are better ways of configuring your theme.

It's also worth pointing out

that if you create a theme data object like this

by instantiating theme data

and then passing some configuration

between those parentheses, you are actually telling Flutter

that you are setting up the entire theme from scratch,

which means that theoretically you really should configure

all these aspects that make up your application.

You should configure all text styles you could possibly use.

You should configure all other styles that might be used

by any widgets in your app.

And whilst this of course can make sense for certain apps,

it also means a lot of extra work

because you might be happy with some default theme styles

that Flutter applies otherwise.

Now of course, you could argue that this app here

by default doesn't look that horrible, and that is correct,

but you'll see a difference if I switch to a different way

of setting up my theme - a way which I would actually

recommend using. Instead of creating your theme data

like this.

It's better if you don't pass anything

to this constructor here

and you instead call copy with

and then to copy with you pass your settings.

Like for example, in my case here, use material three true.

If you do that

and you force a reload, at least for me, I always have

to force a reload

to make these theme settings have an effect

on the running app.

If you do that, you will see

that it now looks slightly different.

It looks slightly different.

For example, this text in the title here looks different,

and I would argue looks a bit better

because now we're actually preserving some better default

styles that are applied by default, by Flutter,

and we can now override selected styles with

that copy with method.

So instead of setting up an entire theme from scratch

and having to style everything from scratch,

we're now using some default themes set up by Flutter

and we're only overriding selected styles

or selected aspects of that theme, you could say.

For example, we could now also target another parameter

here in this copy with method, which we're calling,

and set the scaffold background color to any color

of our choice, and maybe not red, I'll just use this

as a starting point to pick a color.

But then we could go for something like this,

like a a light purple-ish color.

We'll change this later anyways,

but we could do that force those changes to be applied.

And now you would see this background.

Of course, this doesn't look great yet,

but this is how you can now overwrite individual parts

of the overall theme.

And here you can see that it's now in one central place

where I can make certain adjustments like this scaffold

background color, and it will then automatically apply

to all the widgets that are interested in that setting.

In this case, the scaffold widget.

And if I would have an app with multiple screens, so

with multiple instances of the scaffold widget,

all those screens would use this color.

So that's how theming generally works

and how you generally, in most cases,

wanna apply your changes to a theme.

Instead of setting up an entire theme from scratch,

it's often better to copy an existing theme

and then just style individual aspects of that theme.

Transcript
Okay, so now that we have a first idea

of how the theming system generally works

and how we might wanna adjust the theme,

the question of course is how should we now adjust the theme

and which parameters should you set here?

Well, in general, as always, it is a good idea

to simply play around with different parameters here,

but there is at least one thing you should know

before you start playing around with that.

When it comes to setting up colors,

there are many different parameters you can target here,

and you have to understand that this copyWith method

allows you to set up some base colors,

like accentColor, or primaryColor,

which will then be used by multiple widgets

that are built into Flutter.

And you can also use these colors in your own widgets,

as I will show you later.

But besides setting some general colors like this,

you can also set individual colors,

like the scaffoldBackgroundColor,

or you can set up entire sub themes, you could say,

like the elevatedButtonTheme,

which requires a separate ThemeData object,

which then allows you to set up some button specific styles.

And this can of course all be overwhelming,

which is why we will set up these things step by step.

But when it comes to setting up colors,

there is a certain approach which I recommend using,

and that is the usage of a colorScheme.

And that's what I meant before,

the theming system in Flutter

saw a lot of changes over the years.

And colorScheme is now not a new approach,

but arguably the easiest approach

of applying some colors to many widgets

without having to manually

set a bunch of colors individually.

Instead with colorScheme,

the idea is that you define one color scheme

and Flutter then infers colors,

different shades of colors to be precise,

for different widgets.

And for that, I'll first of all create such a color scheme,

and I'll do that outside

of this ThemeData constructor function

to keep my code a bit more organized and structured.

So here I'll create a new variable

and I'll name it KColorScheme.

And starting with K is just a convention

you might wanna use in Flutter

that you set up global variables

with the starting character K.

It's not something you have to do,

but it is something you'll see quite a lot,

especially for theme-related variables in other projects.

So that's why I'll use it here as well.

And the idea here simply is that this variable

now contains a color scheme which we can use down there

for setting up our theme.

And a color scheme can be created

by using Flutter's ColorScheme class.

And whilst you could also create that from scratch,

which again would require you

to set a lot of colors manually,

ColorScheme also gives you a fromSeed method

or a fromSeed constructor function, which I recommend using,

because that is actually the constructor function

that will then automatically create a color scheme

with different shades of colors based on one base color,

one seedColor that you set up.

And here I'll create a color manually with Color.fromARGB.

And here I picked a color in advance

where my alpha channel has a value of 255,

red has 96, the green channel has 59,

and blue has a value of 181.

And this is a constant value, so we can add const here.

And with that ColorScheme defined here,

we can use that as a value down there in our theme.

And if we do that, and again, we enforce those changes,

now you don't see a lot of changes here,

but you see them, if I for example, open that modal.

Here, you see the buttons now have this purple color.

And the background also has a light purple shade at least.

Same is true for these cards here,

which have a light purple background.

And of course, we're also not done yet,

because now with that ColorScheme set up,

you can fine-tune your theme.

Besides setting up the ColorScheme

when setting up the theme,

you can now also overwrite selected parts of the theme

based on your ColorScheme though.

For example, you can set up an appBarTheme here

and create an appBarTheme object.

Again, best done by creating an object

and then using copyWith,

so that you get some default AppBarTheme settings

by Flutter, and you then just override selected settings.

And here you can then, for example,

override the background color of the app bar

and set this to a color from your ColorScheme.

So reference your ColorScheme here,

but now you get different properties on that scheme object

that were inferred and set automatically by Flutter

based on your seed color.

For example, here, I'll choose onPrimaryContainer

as a background color for my app bar.

And I can only encourage you to try out different colors

that were inferred here to see the difference.

But I'll go for onPrimaryContainer.

And I'll also set a foreground color for my AppBarTheme

and also set that based on my ColorScheme.

And here I'll choose the primaryContainer,

so that I pick these two colors from my ColorScheme

that is based on this seed color

to fine-tune my appBarTheme.

And there are more things you could set

on that appBarTheme,

for example, that the title should always be centered,

or that there should be some drop shadow behind it.

These are all things you can set,

and again, definitely play around with these settings,

but since we're using copyWith,

we don't have to set these settings.

Instead we're using the default settings

and we're just overriding backgroundColor

and foregroundColor.

And here we can then actually also use const.

And with that, if we now save this,

you see that I have a totally different look

for my app bar here

because of these selective overrides

which I made in my theme object.

Transcript
So creating a color scheme

and using that as a starting point for your copied theme

and then overriding some selected

aspects of your theme is the way to go.

Now, there are of course, more things that you can override.

For example, we could also apply a card theme,

which will affect all card widgets.

And in case you forgot,

the card widget is the widget we're using

for our expense item here.

So for these items in our list of expenses here,

they use this built-in card widget

and we can override the default styling of the card widget,

which is based on our color scheme,

but which might still not be the styling we want

with help of this card theme.

This wants a card theme object

just as app bar theme wants an app bar theme object.

And just as with the app bar here, I will also copy this.

And that's basically always the approach

you wanna use with theming,

you want to copy an existing theme.

For the card theme here, we can, for example,

target the color parameter alongside other parameters

that you could use to fine tune the look of your cards.

And we could set the color here to our color scheme again,

and now here select the secondary container, for example,

which is another color that was inferred by Flutter.

In addition, we could set the margin

to an edge insets object

just as you do it if you configure it

right on the widget when you use it.

But here you could set up a margin

for all the cards used anywhere in your app

if you had a certain default margin

that you always wanna apply.

And you could, for example here, set a base margin

that will always be used for all cards of 16.

And now here we can also use const and also use const here.

And again, save this and enforce this.

And now the cards would look like this.

And this is actually not bad,

but it's a little bit too much spacing

between those items for me.

Hence, I will actually switch from edge insets all here

to edge insets symmetric,

and keep the 16 pixels horizontally,

but vertically I'll switch to eight

to have a little bit less spacing vertically

between my different cards.

Yeah, I think that looks better.

Now I also showed you before that you can, for example,

set up some default button styles

by targeting the elevated button theme.

And here we want to create an elevated

button theme data object.

And on this object right now, at least

there is no copy with method.

Instead here we always have to create a new object,

but this object takes only one parameter,

the style parameter, which wants a button style object.

And here we could create such a style object

manually with button style,

but then we would again create it from the ground up,

which can sometimes be what you want

to have full control over how the button looks.

But often the better approach

is to use elevated button style

from which again uses Flutter's default styling

and then allows you to override some selected styles.

Unfortunately, we have inconsistencies like this

in the theming system where sometimes it's copy with

and sometimes it's an approach like this,

but that's why I'm showing this to you

for some of the most important widgets you'll work with.

And as always, the official documentation

and also simply Google is your friend

when it comes to finding out

how a specific widget is best themed.

Here for buttons,

I recommend using style from

on the elevated button in this case.

And now we can again target some individual style settings

for all the elevated buttons in the entire app

because that's always the idea behind theming,

you always set up styles for all widgets in the app.

And here we could, for example, change the background color

of our elevated buttons

and set this to K color scheme,

primary container in my case here.

And if I do that and we enforce these changes,

you see that now my elevated button here

has a more visible background color, not super prominent,

but a bit more visible,

which to me looks better than the

almost white background color it had before.

Now I'm almost done with setting up the theme

I wanna use for this app here,

but there's one last setting I also wanna apply here

before we then take a look at some other

theme related topics.

And the last parameter I want to target here

in my general main theme data object

is the text theme parameter.

Because of course in our application,

we also have many places where we output text,

like for example here in the title.

And of course the default text styles might work for you,

but you can of course also fine tune those.

And the best way of fine tuning them on a global level

is to set the text theme parameter

in your theme data object.

Now this one's a text theme object,

and of course as always,

you could create one from the ground up

and then target the different kinds of text

you might be using in your app manually here.

But I personally prefer creating a theme data object

here again, and then on that object,

accessing the text theme.

And then on that text theme here,

you can again call copy with.

This ensures that you're overriding the text theme

that belongs to your theme data object here.

Now, in copy with,

you can then target different parameters.

And these parameters represent different kinds of texts

that are used in different parts of your application.

For example, the text used here in the app bar

is the title large text.

Now how do I know that?

Well, the official documentation of course helps with that.

But in addition to that,

you can also simply try out setting those

different text styles and see which texts

change in your application.

Title large as mentioned,

should allow us to change the text style

of all the places where main titles are presented

like in this app bar.

And now to change the text style,

you have to set a text style object

as a value for title large.

And of course here you can create one from scratch.

Alternatively, you could also access

themedata.texttheme.titlelarge, and then use copy with

to just override selected parts of the text style

of your main title.

It depends on how much you wanna change.

Here I'll create a brand new text style,

and then we could, for example, change the font weight

and change it to font weight normal if we wanted to.

We can of course also set the text color.

And here I'll use my color scheme

and then use on secondary color

as a default color here for me

and maybe set the font size to 14.

If we do all that and enforce those changes,

you see the title now got smaller and is not bold anymore.

Now, regarding the color, you of course have to be careful

because we're also setting a foreground color

in our app bar theme,

which typically should override any text color you set here.

You can prove that if you set it to a color like red,

which would be clearly visible.

Even though I set it to red here, it's not red here

because I have that separate foreground color

in my app bar theme.

But of course, other places where I use this title large

in my application might have a red text color.

So here, I'll switch back to the other text color,

which I actually wanna use,

but it is important to understand how that works.

And with that, I have set up a couple of styles

and a couple of theme settings

that are automatically picked up

by various widgets in this app, as you can tell.

And again, definitely feel free to play around

with all these settings to get a better feeling

for how you can influence the general look

of your application.

But this is also not all you can do with theming.

You cannot just change the general look of your application

or of the built-in widgets.

Instead, you can also reference settings you made here

in your theme data setup from inside your custom widgets

to pick up certain styles

and override styles in your own widgets

based on your general style setup.

And that's what we'll do next.

Transcript
So we got our theme set up.

And this is of course very useful

because it means that we don't have

to manually override all these stylings in

different parts of our app.

But sometimes you of course wanna override certain styles in

your app, but you also at the same time might want to use,

for example, colors from your main theme.

And how could you do that then?

Well, let's, for example, start in expense item.

Here, in expense item, we might want to change the look

of our expense title, and for that of course we can add

the style parameter to this text widget

as we did it before in this course as well.

And we could manually create a text style object here

to set up the styling of the text.

But now that we learned about theming, we can also reach out

to our theme stylings and apply those to this text here.

And to do that, we can use the theme class,

built into Flutter, which has a off method which needs

the context as a value.

And that is a pattern we saw before with the

scaffold messenger.

There, we also had such an off method to basically reach out

to this metadata context object managed by Flutter.

The theme class needs to do the same thing.

It is constructed by connecting it to this context object

and this connection is needed

because through that context object Flutter gets access

to our theme settings, basically.

And now on that theme class or on that theme object

that was created here, we can for example,

access the text theme property to get access

to all the text themes that we set up

and all the default text themes

that were set up automatically that we didn't overwrite.

And then, for example, reach out to title large.

And this will then apply the textiles that are set up

for title large.

So either the default textiles

or as in this case our own textile,

which we set up for title large.

And this text style will now be applied

to this expense title.

And you can see this more clearly if we go back

to the main dart file

and we changed the font weight

of our title large here from normal to bold

and maybe increase the font size to 16.

If we do that and force a reload, you now see

that this title here in our expense item

clearly is bold and has a different look.

Please also note that it has a different color than we have

here in the app bar, because of course,

as mentioned before, in the app bar,

we're setting a separate foreground color, whereas here

we're setting a different general color for title large.

And it's this color here, which is now picked up

by expense item.

As you can again see if I change this back

to colors red, briefly of course only.

But if I do that, you see that now the title is indeed red.

So that's how you can use some settings you set up

in your general theme, in your own widgets.

And of course here I'm switching back

to the actual color I want to use.

So that's how we can pick up theme settings.

Now of course here, I also wanna make sure

that this title is actually pushed all the

way to the left here.

And to achieve this, I don't need to do any theming.

Instead, I can simply go to this column

that contains my text here

and set the cross axis alignment,

which for a column is the horizontal axis

to cross access alignment start.

And this will make sure that all the column items are moved

to the start of the column horizontally,

so to the left in this case.

So that's how we can reach out to our theme

to use certain values from that theme.

But we're not limited to using text settings, for example,

in my expenses list, I also want to add a background color

to this dismissible item so that as we swipe an item away,

we actually have a little background effect that indicates

to us that the item will be deleted.

And this can be achieved by going to the dismissible widget

and setting the background property or parameter there.

Now the background parameter wants a widget,

and for that here we could use the built-in container widget

because this widget allows us to set a lot

of different parameters, including the color,

which is actually the background color of the container.

As you see here, the color it paints

behind a possible child widget you might

include in the container.

And that therefore allows us to set up a background color.

And this of course wants a color.

Now, as before in this course,

we could create a color manually here,

but now that we learned about theming,

we can also pick a color with theme of, from our theme.

And that allows us to pick a color that's more in line

with our general color scheme.

And to do that, we can access theme of

and then .colorScheme to get hold of

that color scheme we set up in our main dart file.

Remember, we created this color scheme with one seed color.

Now as mentioned, this behind the scenes creates a lot

of different shades and variations of that color

for different aspects of the app.

And we can now use those shades

and variance here to access the error color,

which is one of the automatically generated variations

of our seed color for error scenarios.

If I do this and I save everything,

you will see that as I swipe this item here,

I get this red background container coming in,

indicating to me that this is going to be deleted.

Of course here, we then also could apply some fine tuning

and for example, add a margin with edge insets

and then use symmetric to add some horizontal margin

of 16 so that with that, if I force a reload,

this container actually starts where the

list item also starts.

But of course here, we would have the problem

that if we ever change the margin of the list item,

we have to change it here as well.

And you might remember that in main dart I actually set the

margin of the card theme here to horizontal 16.

So that's actually where this margin here is coming from.

So therefore, since this is defined in our theme

in this application here, we of course

can get this margin from our theme, by again

using theme of and then getting the card theme

and there the margin, or if I only wanna apply

the horizontal margin as it's the case here,

I still create an edge insets object

with symmetric to set my horizontal margin.

But this value is then derived from my theme

by accessing cardTheme.margin.horizontal.

And here I'm getting an error

that in the end margin could theoretically be null

because I might not have set it up in my theme,

but here I know that it was set up.

Hence, I can add an exclamation mark

to get rid of this error.

And with that, I get the same effect as before,

but now it's coming from my actual theme.

And these are all things you can do.

Now, being able to use theme data

for fine tuning certain widgets is a very useful feature,

and it does not stop at simply using values

defined in the theme.

Instead, you can also extend or change those values.

For example, for a color like error

or any other color, you can also use one

of the built-in methods Flutters offers, on colors like

with opacity to make this color slightly transparent,

for example, by adding an opacity 0.75.

If you do that, you will see that

now this red tone is slightly transparent.

Now you might or might not want this,

but it is important to understand

that you can adjust those theme controlled values

in the places where you're using them.

For example, in expense item, we're also not limited

to using the title theme like this.

We could also use copy with here to use our general

title large theme settings,

but then overwrite them with specific settings that we want

to use specifically here in this widget.

So, which will not be changed in the general theme,

but which will be adjusted in this widget whilst still

basing our general style on the theme settings.

Now here, I actually got no adjustments I wanna make,

but it is important to be aware

of these fine tuning possibilities.

Important: Adding Dark Mode
In the next lecture, we'll add "Dark Mode" to the app.

The code you'll see in the next lecture works as shown, with one important exception (that you should adjust in your code):

The useMaterial3: true flag is no longer needed if you're using the latest version of Flutter - because Material 3 is already the default with that.

In addition, instead of adding a dark theme like this:

ThemeData.dark(
  useMaterial3: true,
  colorScheme: kColorScheme,
  cardTheme: ...
)
you should add it like this (in the next lecture, when we write that code):

ThemeData.dark().copyWith( // dark() no longer takes any arguments
  useMaterial3: true,
  colorScheme: kColorScheme,
  cardTheme: ...
)
That's all!

Transcript
So at this point

we had a quite detailed look at theme-ing.

There's just one last theme related topic

I also wanna discuss here, and that would be

how you can apply a dark theme

or how you can allow the user to switch

between a dark and a light theme.

Because at the moment we have this light theme

with a lot of white in it,

and some users might prefer dark mode.

Some users might even set dark mode

as their intended default in the device settings.

Like for example, here on Android

where I can search for dark and turn on dark theme.

Now my Android phone is in dark mode,

but of course my app doesn't care.

That's why you might want

to provide an alternative dark theme.

And for that, to do that

we could create a second color scheme,

the dark color scheme.

And here again, we can do this with color scheme fromSeed,

but the seedColor I wanna use here for my dark mode

is now a color, which I also picked in advance,

which uses the fromARGB constructor.

And then values of 255, 5, 99, 125.

Of course, again, you can play around with different colors.

That's just one color I picked here.

And with that dark color scheme set up,

we can now also set a second theme

on that material app besides this theme.

This is our light mode theme,

but we can also now add a dark theme parameter

to material app.

And this dark theme parameter can now be used to configure,

well, a theme for dark mode.

For this, we can again use theme data.

And now conveniently,

there actually is a dark constructor function,

which we can use to get a lot of default dark mode settings

and configurations

so that we don't have to adjust everything manually

to get dark mode to work.

So we can use

this dark theme data constructor function instead.

And then here we can again use copy width

and apply material three by setting this to true.

But then here of course, we can also set our color scheme

and set this to the dark color scheme we just created.

And with that we're creating a dark theme here,

which can be used as an alternative to the main theme.

Of course, that just brings up the question

which theme will be used.

And this can be controlled

with yet another parameter you can set on the material app.

And that would be the theme mode parameter.

Theme mode wants a theme mode object.

And here you can actually choose from

multiple predefined theme mode values.

You can, for example, force the app

to always run in dark mode

or always run in light mode,

ignoring what the user might have set up

in their system settings.

But you can also use theme mode system

to take a look at the system settings chosen by a user

and apply the appropriate theme.

And this is actually the default,

so you don't need to set this yourself,

but it is worth knowing about this setting.

Well, and with that, if you force a reload

and you put your phone into dark mode,

you should see that dark mode.

But here I'm now actually getting an error,

and I'm getting an error now

because in one of my widgets,

in the expenses list widget to be precise,

I'm actually referring to the margin setting

on my card theme.

And I'm telling dart that this will not be null

when actually now in dark mode it is null.

It is null because in dark mode

I am not setting that card theme.

That is why you should also be careful

with using this exclamation mark operator.

You instead might want to check whether this is null or not

and then set different horizontal values

based on the check result.

Here I'll solve the issue by simply copying my card theme

from the light theme to the dark theme here,

so that I am setting these margins again.

And with that, if I force a reload, the error goes away.

And you can see I have this dark background color

on my scaffold now.

You will also see that the other styles

don't look that great though.

And part of the reason for that

is that the color scheme we're generating here

uses a specific seedColor,

but the shades and variants that are generated

by fromSeed are actually optimized for light mode.

We have to tell our color scheme

that the different shades and variants that are generated

should be optimized for dark mode.

And this can be done by setting the brightness parameter

in this fromSeed constructive function

and setting this to brightness dark.

And this tells Flutter that this is a color scheme

for a dark brightness, so for dark mode in the end.

If you now force a reload,

this already looks much better

because we have this dark app bar, for example.

But that being said, the card background color

doesn't look that great though.

And the reason for that simply is that in the dark theme,

I'm currently still using the normal color scheme

which I created first

for getting the secondary container color

off the card theme, and that's the wrong color scheme.

Here we wanna use the newly created dark color scheme,

which takes our dark colors into account.

If we save it with that,

these expenses already look much better.

Now of course, the buttons here in this modal

maybe also don't look that great.

And to change those we can again copy

the elevated button theme settings from the light theme,

the default theme, and add them to the dark theme.

But here, of course, we now also wanna use

the dark color scheme, which we created

and see how that looks like

if we take primary container from there

for our dark color buttons.

With that, this already looks a bit nicer.

Maybe the foreground color should be changed though.

And therefore here for the dark theme

for the elevated button theme,

we could also add foreground color

and set this to kDarkColorScheme.

And then onPrimaryContainer.

Because the primary container is the background color

for the foreground color

which colors the content inside of that button,

onPrimaryContainer might make a lot of sense

if you consider the name of it,

primary container and onPrimaryContainer.

So with that, if we save this,

yeah, that definitely looks better.

We could also change the color of this text button,

but I'm happy with that.

And with that, we now also added a dark theme.

Indeed we added it such that the device settings

are taken into account.

If a user switches back from dark to light mode,

our app adjusts accordingly.

Transcript
So at this point we're almost done

with this app,

and this was another long course module,

but again, with many important new concepts,

and of course a lot of chances

to repeat concepts we learned about before.

Now, the missing piece for this app here

is of course the chart.

And to build this chart here,

I first of all wanna go to my expense model

and add a new class, a new data model to this file.

And that will be the ExpenseBucket class.

Because for building this chart, we need multiple buckets,

one for every category,

so that we can sum up all the expenses

that belong to one category and display them in the chart.

So for that, I'm creating a separate class

that will hold that summed up data.

And this class here, which defines a group of expenses

in the end needs two main properties.

It needs a Category property, which is of type category.

So which uses our own Category enum type here.

And in addition to that,

I also wanna have a list of expenses,

because such a bucket, as mentioned,

will include multiple expenses.

That's the idea behind this class.

Therefore, of course,

we then can add our constructor, ExpenseBucket,

where we set this.category and this.expenses,

and both should also be required, like this.

Now, in addition to setting up those properties

to store all these expenses,

I also wanna add a getter to this class here,

which will return a double value,

so a number with decimal points.

And I'll name this totalExpenses.

And this is simply a utility getter you could say,

which I'm adding, which sums up all the expenses

we have in here,

so that we can conveniently get the totalExpenses

from a bucket.

And keep in mind we'll have one bucket per category.

Now, to build that sum,

I'll create a helper variable sum here,

which starts at zero.

And I wanna return this sum in the end.

But in between these steps, I wanna sum up all the expenses.

And this can be done with a for loop,

though I'll use a new version of that for loop,

a variant of that for loop, which we haven't seen before.

Instead of creating a for loop

where we create a helper variable i

and we then keep on looping as long as i

is smaller than expenses.length, for example,

and we increment i by one after every iteration.

Instead of doing that, which we could also do

to get hold of the individual expenses,

I'll use a variation of that for loop,

which is perfect for going through

all the elements in a list.

You can use this syntax where you create a helper variable,

which for every loop iteration is final

because it will be recreated after every iteration.

And here I'll create a helper variable expense.

And then we can use the special in keyword

to simply tell Dart that we wanna go through

all the items in this list, so in expenses.

And in every iteration, a new item will be picked

and will be stored in a newly created final variable

called expense.

And then therefore inside of that loop body,

so between these curly braces,

we have access to that single expense.

And this simply is an alternative

which is perfect or going through the items in a list,

since it is a bit shorter and maybe easier to understand

than manually managing a helper variable i

and using that as an index,

which you could of course also do though.

But here we can loop through all the expenses

in our expenses list like this

and then simply add the expense amount to the sum

by setting sum = sum + expense.amount.

And this can actually be shortened

and can instead be written like this,

which is the equivalent to setting it like this.

This is simply shorter

and tells Dart that you wanna set sum equal to sum

plus the expense.amount.

And this is therefore how we can define such a getter

that sums up all the expenses in this expense list

and returns a total sum as a number.

And we'll need this helper for the chart,

because in the chart, of course, the different bars

for the different ExpenseBuckets,

so for the different categories,

should be displayed in relation to each other.

And for that, of course, we need to know

the total expense of every bucket

so that we can adjust the chart bar heights.

Transcript
Now adding this getter

to ExpenseBucket is one important step I want to take

before we start creating the actual chart.

The other thing I wanna do here,

I want to add my own alternative named constructor function,

which can be done by repeating

the name of the clause, ExpenseBucket,

and then adding a dot right after it

inside here of the class definition

and then adding the name of the extra constructor function

you want to add to this class.

Like in my case here, forCategory.

That's the extra name I want to use.

And this is how you can add additional constructor functions

to your classes.

And this is of course a feature we used

from time to time in this course.

For example, here on EdgeInsets.symmetric,

where we create such a EdgeInsets object

by using the alternative symmetric constructor function.

This here is how you can define

your own alternative constructive functions,

alternatives to the default constructive function.

So what's the idea behind this alternative then?

Well, my idea here

is that I do get a list of expenses here,

which could be named allExpenses here.

So this is simply a parameter accepted

by this constructive function.

So we expect to get a list

of all expenses here from all categories.

And I also want get a second argument

which sets the category,

which is one of the properties I do wanna set here.

And now the idea behind this extra constructor function

is that we add some logic to this constructor function

to go through all the expenses we got,

and then filter out the ones that belong to this category

so that we can set the expenses for this ExpenseBucket,

which is tied to one specific category

to a list of expenses that only are for that category.

So this is simply a utility constructor function

that takes care of filtering out the expenses

that belong to a specific category.

Now two said this expenses property to the expenses

that have this category at the point of time

this constructor function is called,

we have to add a so-called initializer list

by adding a colon

after our constructor function parameters here,

so after this closing parenthesis,

and then here you can set expenses.

So this property here equal to allExpenses,

so this list of expenses we're getting here,

and then filtered for the expenses with this category.

And this can be done with help of the built in where method.

Now this is a method provided by Dart,

which is available on all lists

and where is simply a method

that allows you to filter a list.

It takes a function as an argument,

so you pass a function here as an argument to where.

Here, an anonymous function using this arrow notation.

And then you automatically get your

individual list items as input.

So here I get a single expense since this function

is executed on all the expense items in allExpenses.

So every time it executes, I get one single expense.

And here we have to return true if we want to keep

that expense in the filtered list

or false if we want to get rid of it.

And here, of course, I don't wanna hard code true or false.

Instead, I wanna derive true or false dynamically

by checking whether the expense

I'm currently evaluating here has a category that's equal

to this category here.

So to the category property of that class.

So if the expense I'm currently taking a look at

has the category I wanna set for this ExpenseBucket,

I want to keep that expense in that list of expenses

that is stored in this bucket,

otherwise it should be dropped.

That's what we're saying here.

And now we just have to make sure

that we convert this back to a list.

And here we have to check with a double equal sign

because a single equal sign tries to assign a value,

which is not what we're doing here.

With a double equal sign, we check for equality,

which is what we want to do here.

And with that,

we got this utility constructor function in place,

which we will soon use to create different buckets

that are represented by chart bars in our chart.

Transcript
Now, with this newly added

ExpenseBucket class here,

we're now ready to work on the actual chart.

And for that, in the Widgets folder, in the Lib folder,

I'll add a chart sub folder,

and I prepared two new widget files,

which you'll find attached to this lecture chart_dart

and chart_bar.dart.

And you should download both

and place them in your Chart folder in the Widgets folder.

Now, these files are responsible

for creating a chart widget,

which then contains multiple ChartBars.

And I'll walk you through these widgets in just a second.

You should make sure that in chart.dart

these imports work for you

so that you're using your project name here

and that you have the same folder names.

I'm using widgets, models, chart, and so on.

Of course, you also must use the same file names.

And you should make sure

that if you named your model differently,

the ExpenseBucket or the expense model,

you update those names here in chart.dart.

After all, errors should be highlighted

if you have any in this file.

If you followed along with the same conventions I used

throughout this section though,

this file should work fine for you.

And the same should be true for chart_bar.dart.

Attached, you'll also find a link

to my complete current project snapshot,

so that you can also compare the other code files to yours

in case you're facing any errors

with those newly added files.

But what do these files do now?

Well, first of all, let's use them.

In expenses.dart, we wanna replace

this chart placeholder here

with the new chart widget that we just added.

So for this, we have to import chart.dart

from the Widgets folder,

and they are from the newly added Chart folder.

So that import here must be added.

And with that import added,

we can use the chart, which is here in this column,

and we must set the named expenses parameter

to our _registeredExpenses here.

So to all our expenses.

Because in the chart.dart file, we're then actually getting

those expenses and storing these expenses in a property.

But I got a getter, a helper getter,

which then creates these ExpenseBuckets.

Using this newly added ExpenseBucket class

on which we worked over the last lectures

to create different buckets for different categories,

so that we have these four buckets that are needed

to display these four bars or up to four bars in the chart.

Because if we save everything now and force a reload,

we should see this chart here.

And if we switch to dark mode,

which we, of course, also can do,

this chart should also look good in dark mode.

Yeah, so this also looks quite nice.

But how is this being displayed?

Well, we got these buckets here, as mentioned,

which are generated in this getter,

and this getter is in the end used down there

in this widget tree to go through all these buckets

and create these ChartBars.

Now, this code here might look strange,

though I have mentioned it before in this course already,

but it's still worth repeating what this code does.

As I annotated here, it's an alternative

to the built-in map method.

And you can use this code here in your widget tree

if you're inside of a list of widgets.

So if you're in a place where a list of widgets is required,

like here for the children of a row.

Then you can use this for loop here

with a syntax that's similar to what I showed you

in this ExpenseBucket class in this getter here

where we also had such a for in loop.

But if you're using it in a widget

or in a place where a list of widgets is expected,

you actually have no curly braces thereafter,

instead you just have this for in loop like this

to loop through a bunch of pieces of data,

and then right below this for loop syntax here,

you have the widget that should be created

for every item in that list of data.

So here I'm creating one ChartBar widget

for every bucket in my list of buckets.

And buckets, keep in mind, is this getter here

where I return this list of four ExpenseBucket instances.

So I'm looping through these buckets here

and I'm creating one ChartBar in this list

that belongs to this row for every bucket.

Now, the ChartBar has one fill parameter,

which is set to a number.

And the number is based on the total expenses in a bucket.

So that is this totalExpenses getter being used here.

So the sum of all the expenses that belong

to a certain category, divided by maxTotalExpenses.

And maxTotalExpenses is actually a getter

that belongs to this chart widget.

In this getter, I go through all my buckets

with another for in loop,

and then I simply determine the highest total expense

from all these buckets, so from all these four buckets,

in this case here.

I do that here by taking a look

at each bucket's total expenses,

so the sum of all the expenses in that bucket,

and if that's higher than the highest total expense

I got up to this point starting at 0,

I take that bucket's total expenses

as the highest amount of total expenses.

And I'm doing this because in the end, in the chart,

the goal, of course, is to put these different bars

in relation to each other.

And the bucket with the highest expense

should have the tallest ChartBar

and the other buckets' ChartBars should be drawn

in relation to that.

So that's what I'm doing here with this getter.

And I'm simply passing the division of the total expenses

of a single bucket by the maximum total expense

across all buckets to ChartBar,

because in chart_bar, we're using this fill parameter

and this fill property here

to set our ChartBar height.

And I'm doing this with a new widget,

the fractionally sized box,

which simply does not take a fixed height in pixels,

but a height factor instead,

which simply is a number between 0 and 1.

And 1 means that it takes 100% of the available height,

0 means it takes 0%.

And that, of course, is a very helpful widget

for setting different ChartBar heights therefore.

Besides that, I'm not doing anything fancy

just setting some colors based on my theme.

Though here, it's worth pointing out

that I'm actually dynamically deriving

whether we are in dark mode or not

with help of this line of code,

to which I'll get back in just a second.

But other than that, I just got some default styling here.

And in chart.dart, I'm also not doing anything fancy

besides setting these ChartBars.

I just got more widgets to also display these icons

below the ChartBars, that's what I'm doing with this row,

where I'm mapping all my buckets to icons, essentially,

using my categoryIcons map,

which we created way earlier in this course section.

This map here in expense.dart in the Models folder,

I'm using that here to set the Icons below the ChartBars.

And I'm also dynamically finding out

whether I'm in dark mode or not here as well.

So what's up with this line of code then?

In flatter, you can use the built-in MediaQuery class

combined with off context to get some information

about the environment in which your app is running,

so to say, and we'll see MediaQuery again

in the next course section.

Here we're using it to find out what the current brightness

of the platform is, if it's dark or light,

so if we're running in dark mode or in light mode.

And I'm doing this because down here,

I actually wanna set different colors

based on whether I am in dark or light mode.

Of course, we can set up totally different colors

in our themes, but here I'm actually using different colors

of the generated theme color schemes as you can see.

Secondary in dark mode versus primary in light mode.

And that's therefore, a never useful pattern to know.

You're not limited to just setting some colors

in your themes and then using those colors everywhere.

Instead you can set up those colors,

but if you then have a case like we have it here

where in dark mode you want to use the secondary shade

that was generated, whereas in light mode,

the primary color looks better,

you can dynamically find out in which mode you are running

with help of MediaQuery.

And I'm doing this here in the chart.dart file,

but also in the chart_bar.dart file.

Here I'm also dynamically deriving

whether we're running in dark mode or not

to dynamically use a different color

for the color of my decorated box here,

which in the end defines the color of the ChartBars.

And that's therefore, a never theme related pattern

that's worth knowing that you can use different settings

based on whether you're using dark or light mode

directly in the widgetry as we're doing it here

with help of MediaQuery.

And that's also how such a chart could be rendered.

You also saw this for syntax here

for outputting a list of widgets,

which is similar to this for syntax we used here

in a non-widget place.

It's almost the same,

but we don't have the curly braces here.

And as mentioned here, it's simply an alternative to map

when using it here in a place

where a list of widgets is wanted.

You see the alternative down there actually.

Here I am using buckets map,

and we could indeed replace this with for in here as well,

just as we're doing it here.

But that's therefore, how we can add such a chart,

which works in dark and in light mode,

and how we can in general build such an expense tracker.

Transcript
And that's now it for this course section.

Another long course section,

but a course section with many new crucial concepts.

We did, for example,

learn how we can show things like a snack bar

or a modal bottom sheet,

or how we can handle user input with text fields

and with dropdown buttons as we're doing it here.

How we can, for example, build such a manual date picker

by showing a date picker with the built-in

show date picker function that is provided by Flutter.

We learned how we can show a dialogue,

and along the way we learned

that this context object is important

for all these methods since it carries some meta information

about a widget

and the widget's relation to our widgets that are required

by Flutter to show all these extra elements.

You learned how you can handle user input

with text editing controllers

or by manually storing the input values

as we're doing it here for a selected date

and selected category.

You learned that if you're using text editing controller,

you also must dispose of it with help

of the built-in dispose method into which you can hook

to make sure that the memory

for these controllers is freed up as they are removed.

You, of course, also learned about many other new widgets

in this course section here,

like, for example, the icon button or app bar,

which we used in this app.

You also practiced many of the patterns

and things you learned in previous course sections,

like passing pointers at functions to your own widgets

so that some child widget can call a function

that belongs to a parent widget.

You learned about useful widgets like the list view widget

with its builder method,

which is great for building lists

of unknown length in a high-performance way.

You learned about the dismissible widget,

which is great for easily making list items dismissible,

as the name kind of suggests, I guess.

And you, of course, also learned about theming,

how you can define

and use different color themes,

how you can define different themes for light and dark mode,

and how you can make sure that you're using built-in themes

and you just copy them

and overwrite exactly the settings you wanna overwrite

so that you don't have to set everything up from scratch,

though you can also do that if you want to.

And with that, you now, of course,

got even more important tools in your Flutter tool belt

that will help you build exactly the apps you wanna build.

But of course, we're also not done yet.

We can and will dive in way deeper.

Section 6:

Transcript
In the previous course section,

we built this expense tracker app here

where we can add new expenses, delete expenses,

and see our expenses in a chart here, which updates

whenever we change our expenses.

In this course section here, we're going to build up

on that project and make this application

that we built there, responsive and adaptive.

And for that, in this course section here,

you are of course going to learn what exactly responsive

and adaptive means.

You will learn how you can change the layout

of your app based on the available screen sizes

that you have available on the devices

where your app runs.

You will learn how you can detect and use screen

and platform information

and how you can build adaptive widgets,

and what adaptive widgets are in the first place.

Transcript
Now to dive into the concepts of responsive

and adaptive apps and widgets,

I'm back here in this expense tracker project

on which we worked in the previous course section.

And attached you find my lib folder,

which you could drag and drop into a new project

in case you did not follow along in the previous section.

You should then also make sure that you install the uuid

and intl packages into that project, though,

so that these dependencies are added

to your pubspec.yml file.

And with that, you are ready to follow along.

So what's this course section all about?

What are responsive apps and adaptive widgets?

Well, with responsive app,

I mean that if I have a device

where screen rotation is unlocked, that's important,

and I then rotate my screen,

the app does generally adjust,

but, of course, the UI is not optimized for that.

Here you can see that this UI now looks awful.

I have this chart, which is way too big,

and I have my list of expenses here,

which, yeah, is scrollable,

but which takes up only a small chunk

of the available space.

On the other hand, if I try to add a new expense,

this screen here is all right,

but we also could organize this screen differently

because with all that available width

that we have here in landscape mode,

we could, for example,

position the amount next to the title

and the dropdown next to the date picker

or something like this.

So the UI is simply not optimized

for this screen rotation.

That's the problem.

And a responsive app is an app where the layout

and styling adjusts to the available space,

to the available width,

and to the mode in which the app is run,

so to portrait or landscape mode.

That's what responsiveness means

and what we're going to take a closer look at

in this course section.

Transcript
So let's see what we can do

to optimize our app for different screen orientations

and available widths and heights.

And one thing we could of course do

is that we could disable this landscape mode altogether.

We could simply ensure that our app never adjusts

when the device is rotated,

so that our app can effectively only be used in one mode,

in portrait mode, for example.

That is something we could do

and it is something we can do in flutter as well.

And to do that in flutter,

we first of all have to import something

in our main.dart file,

so where this main function is.

And here we have to import a package, the flutter package,

but from the flutter package,

we have to import from the services dart file.

Which is a file we haven't used up to this point,

but this is a file that exposes some functionality

that we can, for example,

use to lock the screen orientation of our app.

And we can use a feature from the services dart file

in our main function

before we even run the app.

Here, we can use the system Chrome class

provided by flutter in the end,

and there set the preferred orientations

by calling set preferred orientations.

Now set preferred orientations

then takes a list of all the device orientations

we want to allow.

And setting such orientations

will then effectively prevent our app

from adjusting to other orientations

that are not specified in this list.

So here in this list,

we can then access the device orientation object here

or the device orientation enum to be precise

and access the different orientations.

And for example, here we can set the preferred orientations

to portrait up and only portrait up.

Now with this code added here,

you then have to chain a method after it, the then method,

because set preferred orientations

actually gives you a future,

and I covered futures in the previous course section.

In the end, it's a object that provides a then method,

which then wants a function as a value

which will be executed once the future

is done with a certain task.

In this case,

once the device orientations have been locked in, so to say.

Now in here in this then method,

you should therefore provide a function,

in this case an anonymous function as input.

And this function actually receives another function

as input itself.

But we don't need to worry about that

since we don't need to do anything with that function.

We just have to accept it here.

And you should then move your run app code.

So this entire run app function here

into this then function.

So into this function you pass to then,

so that the app basically only gets started

or the UI only gets applied

once the orientation has been locked in.

With that code added,

you should also add another line of code

before you call set preferred orientations.

And here you should reach out to widgets, flutter, binding,

and call ensure initialized on that.

This is required to make sure that locking the orientation

and then running the app works as intended.

If you now force a restart,

or better yet you stop your currently running session,

and run the app again without debugging here,

you should see that now once the app started,

if you rotate the device, it does not rotate anymore.

I mean the device of course rotates this emulator,

but the app in there is stable and does not change.

So this now works as intended here

and we force the user to use the app

in exactly the way we want them to use the app.

Now locking the device orientation

is one way of ensuring that the app is used as intended.

And for some apps,

this is the best way of ensuring that the app

and the UI works,

because some user interfaces simply can't be adjusted

to work in landscape mode.

But for this app we can indeed adjust it accordingly.

And therefore for this app,

I'll actually get rid of the code I wrote before.

I will comment it out here.

I will not log the device orientation

and I'll also get rid of that code down there,

therefore, of these closing parentheses,

and get rid of this import.

I will get rid of all of that and stop this running session

and restart the app

to make sure that it really works in all modes again now.

Because the next step now

is to make sure that our UI does adjust to landscape mode

and different device orientations.


Transcript
Now to adjust our app UI

to different orientations,

let's first of all take another look

at this landscape mode UI.

What's wrong with that here?

Well, the problem is that this chart is too big

and this list doesn't have enough space, therefore.

A better UI here would be

to have the chart on the left

and the list to the right, for example.

And of course, that's just one possible way

of improving the UI.

Definitely feel free to use this as a practice opportunity

to build different UI variations for different orientations.

But here I want to indeed move the chart to the left

and the list to the right.

The question now just is,

how do we do that without breaking portrait mode?

Because of course here in portrait mode,

I want to keep the UI like this.

I only wanna adjust it if we're in landscape mode,

or if we have that much width available to be precise.

On an iPad, for example,

we also might want to have the layout on the left

and the list on the right,

even if it would be in portrait mode.

So it's really the width I care about.

If I have a lot of width available,

having chart next to list might be preferable

to having the chart above the list.

So how can we adjust the code dynamically

to the available space

and update the UI if that space changes,

for example, because the device was rotated?

Well for that we can go to expenses Dart

because that is in the end where

I do output the chart and my list here,

this main content in the end is the list

if we have some list items.

And therefore it's in the end here

where we wanna switch from a column to a row

if we are in landscape mode,

because that would ensure that items would be rendered

next to each other instead of above each other.

With a column they are rendered above each other,

with a row, they would be rendered next to each other.

So therefore what we need to do here

in this build method of expenses Dart

is we need to find out how much width we have available.

And if it's enough width,

we wanna switch from a column to a row.

Now to find out how much width we have available,

we can use the media query class provided by Flutter.

And you briefly saw media query

towards the end of the previous course section.

Media query has an of construction function,

which wants the context object as input

since that holds important information,

meta information to be precise,

about the widget in which this code executes

and its position in the overall widget tree.

And once media query has been connected

to context like this,

you can access various pieces of information

on that created media query object.

For example, there is a size property which you can access,

and this size property gives you access to a size object

which holds more information

about the available size on the device.

For example, you can get the aspect ratio

of the screen on which your app is running,

but you can also get the height and width,

and that simply is the available width and height

on the device in which your app is running.

So here if I access width, for example,

I get the width of my screen.

And if I simply print this here

so that we can take a look at that

and we maybe also print the height here,

we can see that if I save this and I force a reload,

and we then open this debug console,

that we see the width and height being output here.

And of course the exact numbers will depend on the device

you are simulating this app on,

but this here would be the width and height

of the virtual device on which this app is running.

Now if I rotate this, you will see

that it automatically prints new values here,

which are the same values as before, just swapped,

because now the old height is the width

and the old width is the height

because we switched from portrait to landscape mode.

And since this gets printed again here,

we also see that the build method seems to execute again

if you rotate the device.

And indeed this is something Flutter does for you,

it executes this build method again

so that with the media query,

you get the updated width and height

so that you could adjust your UI

that's returned by that build method,

so the widgetry that's returned by that build method,

to the available width and height.

Therefore now that we know that,

we can store that width in a variable

just to make working with it a bit easier.

And now we could use that width

to render a row instead of a column

if we have enough width available.

For this, we can use any

of the conditional rendering approaches we learned about.

For example, we can use a turnary expression.

And we can use this with variable,

which I just created, this one here,

down here in the body of this scaffold widget.

And maybe check if width is smaller than 600, let's say.

And if that's the case, we wanna render a column

so that we have the chart above the list

because we don't have a lot of width available,

hence having this vertical layout makes more sense.

On the other hand,

if the width is equal to 600 or greater than 600,

we want to switch to a row instead.

So we then we want to render a row here.

And of course the children of the row

are the same as before for the column.

So we can copy those children

into the children list off the row.

And with that we switch from a column to the row

depending on how much width we have available.

Now there's just one thing we have to do

because right now this actually fails

and we see nothing on the screen

because one thing we have to adjust now

is related to our chart.

This chart widget in the end renders a container

that has a width set to double infinity.

Now I'll get back to what exactly the problem with that is,

but in a nutshell, the problem is that

with this width setting here,

this container simply tries to take up

as much width as it can get,

only restricted by the parent widget

in which this container,

so in which this chart in the end, is included.

The problem with the chart being inside of a row now is

that the row also has a width of infinity,

so it tries to get as much width as possible.

And if you have a child

that tries to get as much width as it can get

and you have a parent that tries to get

as much width as it can get,

you get an error because Flutter

is not able to display a UI.

To work around that,

you should wrap the chart also in expanded,

which is basically always the solution

whenever you have widgets nested into each other

that don't work together like this.

And it should work.

So if you save this and force a reload,

you now see that indeed the chart sits next to the list.

And with that, we now got a UI that makes way more sense

because now this UI works here on landscape,

but it also works on portrait mode.

And you see that as I switch between those modes,

the UI gets updated

and gets adjusted to the available width.

And that's exactly what response of the sign means,

your layouts adjust to the available sizes.

Transcript
Now before we continue

with adjusting our app to different device sizes

and we, for example, work on this modal

and how it looks like in landscape mode,

there's one thing I want to take a closer look at.

And that would be widget size constraints,

or specifically the issue we had before

with the chart not working inside of a Row.

I want to make sure that you really understand

what exactly the problem was with that

and why we need Expanded here.

And for that it's really important

to understand the concept of size constraints in Flutter,

and to understand how in general Flutter widgets

get sized and displayed on the screen.

Because it's important to understand

that widgets actually get sized

based on their size preferences

and the size constraints applied by the parent widget.

And to make this sentence a little bit less abstract,

let's take a look at the Column widget.

This Column widget has some preferences

regarding the size it wants to occupy.

It wants to take as much height as it can get,

but it only needs as much width

as defined by its largest child,

So as defined by its children overall.

But since the Column, in theory,

of course, wants to take as much height as possible,

it's important that the Column widget is inside of a parent

that restricts the height because otherwise

it would go outside of the screen boundaries,

which is not the goal.

That's why we, for example,

have no problem if a Column is used directly

inside of a Scaffold widget.

So as a value for the body parameter of a Scaffold widget

because the Scaffold widget turns out

to constrain the height and the width

to the maximum device height or width.

But every widget has different constraints

for its child widgets.

So this is just an example here.

But for this example,

since we have the Column inside of a Scaffold

with those constraints,

the result would be that the maximum Column height

is actually the maximum device height

because that is the constraint by the parent widget,

and the constraint of the parent widget

overwrites the preferences of the child widget.

That's how sizing generally works in Flutter.

And you can actually see this

if you open the Flutter dev tools.

Here, I'm doing this in a browser.

Now if we open this Flutter inspector,

we can browse this widget tree

and select different widgets there.

And if we, for example, select this Column,

which is right below the Scaffold,

we can see that here on the right

we get this layout explorer.

And this layout explorer, for example,

tells us the height and the width

that was assigned to this Column widget,

but it also tells us

the constraints this Column widget get from its parent.

So in this case, from the Scaffold.

And here, for example,

we see that for the width the constraint was that anything

between zero and the maximum device width is allowed.

And for the height it's the same, zero and maximum height.

And therefore the Column widget

actually chose the maximum height and the maximum width,

though the width simply depends

on the child widgets inside of the column.

Because as mentioned before, for the Column widget,

and actually for most Flutter widgets,

the actual height or width that is taken

depends on what the child widgets want.

Though for the Column widget, there is something special

to be noted regarding the height constraints

it passes down to its children.

So to the Chart, for example,

which is inside of the Column.

We can see those constraints in here.

Here we see that it's unconstrained vertically

so that the Column widget does not pass

any height constraints to its child widgets,

so to the widgets that are passed to the Column.

And that, for example, would be a problem

for the ExpensesList

because this in the end renders a ListView,

which is also just a list and kind of a Column therefore.

And indeed the ListView

by default also would have no constraints.

We don't see it here when we select the ListView,

but actually if we select the child inside of the ListView,

this Dismissible widget,

we can see that for the Dismissible widget

its height is unconstrained.

And since it is inside of the ListView,

that of course means that it's the ListView

that's not constraining the height for Dismissible.

So ListView has a unconstrained height as does Column,

and therefore ListView would not be restricted

in the height it tries to take up.

And therefore it would of course go out of the boundaries

of the device screen on which the app is running

because there simply is no height constraint.

And that's exactly why you need this Expanded wrapper here

because Expanded does something special.

If you add Expanded as we're doing it here

around the ListView,

in the end, Expanded does set height constraints.

It sets the maximum height of its child widgets,

so of the ListView in case of this Expanded widget here,

to the maximum available height.

Instead of getting as much height as possible,

so a height of infinity in the end,

it takes as much height as it can get.

And that's an important difference

compared to an infinite amount of height,

which is what Column and ListView would set as constraints.

Expanded narrows that down

and limits the available height to its child widget,

so to the ListView in case of this Expanded widget here

to the actual available height,

that's why wrapping unconstrained widgets with Expanded

makes sure that unconstrained widgets

inside of other unconstrained widgets,

as we have it here with ListView inside of Column,

doesn't cause any problems anymore.

That's also the problem we fixed here with the Row and Chart

because Chart actually does not render a Row,

but a Container where I explicitly set

the width to double.infinity

to make sure that this container takes

as much space as it can possibly get.

But of course that's a problem

if we do this inside of a Row,

which also has a width of infinity.

With Expanded, as I just described,

this is fixed because expanded between Row and Chart

makes sure that chart is actually limited

and can only take as much width as is actually available.

And that's how widgets are sized

and what size constraints are all about.

This in the end, explains why certain widgets

can be used inside of other widgets without problems

and why, for example, a Column inside of a Column

could cause a problem,

but those problems then can be fixed, for example,

by adding an Expanded widget between the two Columns.

Transcript
So now with this exploration of sizing

and constraints out of the way, I wanna get back

to making this app a bit more responsive.

And for that, we of course already made sure

that we have the chart next to the list,

but now I wanna work on this modal.

Now this actually does also work in landscape mode,

but I would say we could use this space a bit better

if we are in landscape mode because we, for example,

don't need this long title row here.

In addition, of course, we have the problem that right now

if I open my keyboard,

I actually can't reach the other inputs,

and that therefore is also something we might want to fix.

It's also the reason why I'm getting an error here

in Visual Studio Code after opening the keyboard here

in this landscape view of this modal.

Now, first of all, let's make sure

that we can open this keyboard

and actually reach all inputs.

To achieve this, we have to go to new_expense.dart

because that is in the end where we do render this form.

And in the build method of our new expense state class here,

we can again use MediaQuery.of context

as we did it before,

but now not to calculate the available width or height,

at least not yet.

But instead on this MediaQuery object,

we can also access a viewInsets object.

And this is an object that contains extra information

about UI elements

that might be overlapping certain parts of the UI.

For example, if I access viewInsets.bottom here,

I get any extra UI elements

that are overlapping the UI from the bottom.

And that's of course exactly what this keyboard does.

It slides in from the bottom and over overlaps my UI.

So here with MediaQuery of viewInsets.bottom,

I can get the amount of space taken up by that keyboard.

I can then save this in keyboardSpace

or whatever you want to name it

and now we could use that to adjust our padding here

and actually add more padding from the bottom if this space

is taken up by the keyboard.

So we could set the bottom padding here

to keyboard space plus 16 so that we always have

at least 16 pixels of bottom padding,

but we add that extra space

that might be taken up by the keyboard.

Now if we do that, we have to remove const though,

since EdgeInsets is now calculated dynamically.

Now, if you do set the padding like this

and you save everything,

you'll note that nothing changes though,

we still get this error.

The reason for that is that we also must make the content

of this modal sheet, so this widget tree that is returned

by the new expense widget scrollable,

so that we actually can scroll away

because if you take a look at the screen,

of course this must be scrollable,

otherwise we can't reach the other input fields.

Therefore, we should wrap this padding widget

with another widget.

So I'll choose that refactor action

and choose the SingleChildScrollView here,

which you also saw before in the course already.

Now if you do that and you save everything and reload,

you'll see that this looks much better.

Now this is scrollable and we can reach all the inputs.

Of course, it's still not ideal,

but on landscape mode, we'll have to live with that

because we do have that keyboard there

and there is only a limited amount

of height left thereafter, it is what it is.

But now at least this looks better.

Though you will note that if you close the keyboard,

the modal sheet now actually does not take up

the entire height anymore, and you might be fine with that,

but you can also make sure

that it does take up the entire height again.

By the way, here, I'm still getting an error

that there is some overflow,

but this seems to be some weird behavior or bug

since I can't detect any overflow here.

I can reach everything and everything seems to work here,

so it looks like this is kind of a buggy error message here.

Either way, to make sure that we take up

the entire height again,

I'll wrap this SingleChildScrollView

with another widget.

I'll wrap it with a SizedBox to be precise

because on that SizedBox, I can set the height

and I'll set it to double infinity

to make sure that this takes up as much space as it can get.

And with that, if we save this and reload,

I get this full screen mode again.

Still scrollable, but full screen.

And this strange error message,

which I'm going to ignore here.

But that is how we could make sure

that we can always reach all the contents

no matter if we view this application here in landscape mode

or as before in portrait mode.

There, of course, it also still works as it should.

Transcript
So now that we're making sure

that we respect the keyboard, and we make this scrollable

and add some padding at the bottom

if the keyboard is opened,

we also might wanna take another look

at these device elements like the camera,

which could be overlapping our content.

We fixed this in the previous section

by adding some top padding here,

and of course this works, but the problem is

that we have to pick an amount of padding here

that will probably work on all devices.

And whilst we can, of course make some guesses here

that are likely to work,

this is not necessarily the ideal approach.

Instead, there is a better way of solving this.

And for that, I'll first of all set this back

to the actual amount of padding I'd like to have,

no matter if there is some camera in the device or not.

But with that, of course you'll notice

that now the camera does overlap the title,

but before we'll fix this,

I wanna take a look at another screen.

For example here this starting screen.

Here it looks like Flutter automatically makes sure

that the title and this plus button here

are not behind that camera or that system bar.

So Flutter seems to have some built-in mechanism

that makes sure that we stay away

from these device features.

Unfortunately, that just does not seem to work here

for this modal, but we can make it work there.

When we open that modal

from inside the expenses start file

here in show modal bottom sheet,

we can add an extra parameter

which is called Use Safe Area.

And we can set this to true.

A safe area is a simple feature built into Flutter

that makes sure that we stay away from device features

like the camera that might be affecting our UI.

And widgets like the scaffold widget

automatically use this safe area concept internally.

So in most cases you don't have to worry about it.

But for the modal overlay,

at least at the point of time where I'm recording this,

Flutter does not by default use this safe area concept,

but we can unlock it by setting this parameter.

And if we do that, Flutter will take a look at the device

on which the app is running,

and it will know how much space is occupied by the camera

that might be embedded in the screen, for example.

And therefore, now if I click this plus button,

you see that the modal stays away from that system bar.

And that's of course an enhancement

because it makes sure that the app looks better,

and we don't have to guess how much padding

we need to add to the top.

Transcript
So now with all these improvements

out of the way,

let's come back to making our app more responsive,

especially here in landscape mode.

This modal now works and looks better than it did before,

but I also mentioned before already

that we might want to move the amount input here

into the same row as the title input,

and then this dropdown button

into the same row as the date picker.

And we could do this inside of new_expense.dart,

by again using the media query,

just as we did it in expenses.dart.

There, we also took a look at the media query

to render a different UI based on the available width.

We could replicate this approach here in new_expense,

and it would be a fine way of solving this problem,

but I'll actually go for a different solution.

Because besides MediaQuery,

Flutter also gives you a specific widget you can use

for building a UI, a layout,

that automatically adjusts to the available space.

And for that here, in new_expense.dart, in the build method,

I will actually return a different widget,

instead of the SizedBox.

I'll return the LayoutBuilder widget,

which is built into Flutter.

And LayOut Builder is a widget

that takes a builder parameter,

which actually wants a function as an argument,

a function which will automatically get the context object

and a constraints object.

So therefore here, I'll register an anonymous function

where I get this context and this constraints object.

And it's now inside of this function,

where we should return this SizedBox

and this entire widget tree.

So I'll cut it here,

and return it here inside of this function,

which we pass to the builder parameter of LayoutBuilder.

Here we go.

With that, if you save this and force a reload,

you will see that nothing changed.

If I open this modal, it looks and works as it did before.

But now inside of this function here,

which we passed to the builder parameter,

we get access to this constraints object.

And if we print this constraints object,

or to be precise, some of its properties,

we can see what's inside of that constraints object.

Because this constraints object is all about telling us

which constraints are applied by the parent widget

in which we use this widget here,

so the parent widget of the new expense widget.

And this constraints object tells us

the minimum amount of width we can use

and the maximum amount of width we can use,

and then the same for the height, min height and max height.

So if I save this and reload,

you will see that as I open this modal,

and I opened that debug console, I see the values here.

And here I actually only have three values,

because for min and max width it's the same value,

I have that fixed without any choice.

Now, how can these values be helpful?

Well, with them you know exactly

how much space you have available,

and you can then decide which layout should be rendered.

And this, for example, allows you to build a widget

that can be used anywhere in your widget tree,

and it does not care about the available width

or height of the screen,

it does not care about the screen orientation,

but it only cares how much width and height is available

to this specific widget here.

Now of course here, for this new expense widget,

since it is inside of that modal,

it is essentially the screen dimensions

that are available to us here.

It's the width and height of the screen, essentially.

So therefore we could also just use MediaQuery,

which does give us the screen width and height.

But we could now also use the new expense widget

anywhere else in our widget tree,

and it would only care about the constraints set

by the parent widget, it would not care

about the available screen width or height.

And we can then use this information here

to dynamically change our layout.

So for example here,

we could store the maximum amount of width

that we can use in a width variable,

and now use that variable,

just as we used variable here in expenses.dart

to render a different combination of widgets

based on the available width.

And LayoutBuilder will call this builder function again

whenever the constraints change.

So if the widget gets moved somewhere else,

or if we for example, change the device orientation.

So therefore, this will be updated

if the available min and max with values change.

And now we can use this width information

in this column here in this SizedBox

to render the content of the column,

the widgets in that column,

so the rows of that column, conditionally.

And we can do this by using a special syntax

offered by Dart, that can be used in lists like this,

where you write if, and then your condition,

for example, that the available width is greater

or equal than 600.

And then in the next line, you add the item to the list

that should be added if this condition is met.

So in this case, for example, a row,

so that we can have multiple widgets next to each other

in this column.

And you can also add a else statement

to define which widgets should otherwise be added

to this list.

So this is a list-specific if-else syntax

where you don't have curly braces,

but instead just if with your condition,

and then the widget that is added to the list

if the condition is met,

and else, the widget, if the condition is not met.

So with that, we are adding a row with multiple widgets

if we have enough space,

and otherwise we only have a single text field

in that first column row here.

Now, if I do have enough space

for multiple child widgets in the first column row,

I still wanna render my text field here,

so I'll copy and paste that.

And we could outsource it into a separate widget

to reuse some logic, instead of copy and pasting it here.

But for the moment, I'm fine with copy and pasting

to simply show you this general idea

of using LayoutBuilder to build dynamic layouts.

And therefore then, here in this row

after this title text field, we could add a SizedBox

that adds some width as spacing,

before we then add our amount widget,

which is this text field.

And this is wrapped in an expanded widget,

because text fields are actually widgets

that are also unconstrained regarding their width,

as is the row.

And as you learned before,

if you have an unconstrained widget

inside of another unconstrained widget,

you would face problems.

That's why we should actually keep this expanded widget here

since we're again in a row, and then add it here,

and actually also add Expanded here

for this first text field,

since this would otherwise also cause us problems.

So with that, we have this row with the title text field,

some spacing, and the amount text field,

if we have enough space,

and otherwise, if that's not the case,

we just have the title text field in the first row.

Therefore here, if I save that

and force a reload for example, you will see

that now Title and Amount are next to each other.

The styling is a bit off, but we'll fix this soon,

but they are in the same row.

And on the other hand, if I rotate this,

you see that they are still in different rows.

So that's how you can build different layouts

for different device sizes.

Of course, we still need to fix some things here,

because right now I have two amount fields here,

for example, and the styling also is a bit off.

Now regarding the styling, we can go to this row here

and add some cross-axis alignment here,

which in case of a row is the vertical alignment,

and set this to CrossAxisAlignment.start

to make sure that all the inputs in the first row get pushed

to the top, so that this now looks better.

And of course, we also wanna rearrange the second row here,

and get rid of that amount,

and instead move the dropdown button here

if we have enough width.

So therefore, we can go back to our widget tree here.

And after this first row here, with this if statement,

where we render the row or the title text field,

we can go to the next row

and render this entire row conditionally,

and check if width is greater or equal than 600.

And if it is, I want to render a row

that contains my LEISURE dropdown and the date picker,

and if it's not, I wanna render this row

which contains the amount controller and so on.

So therefore, this here is my else case,

but now we also need to define the layout

that should be rendered if there is enough width.

And for that here,

we then want to take this dropdown button.

So copy that,

and again, you could outsource it into a separate widget

and arguably that might be preferable,

but here I'll just copy it,

and then add a SizedBox maybe again for some spacing,

before we then add the date picker.

So here we can now grab this date picker,

which is wrapped by this expanded widget

since it is inside of a row,

and paste this here after this SizedBox.

So with that, I now also have my row

that should be rendered if we have enough space.

So if we save this and force a restart,

we indeed do have the dropdown next to the date picker here.

Of course, we also still have the dropdown here,

and therefore of course we'll have to fix this

and get rid of it, if we do have enough width available.

So therefore, if we go down here to this row

where the dropdown button is included next to the buttons,

we also want to add another if check

with the same condition as before.

If we have enough width, we wanna render something else,

else, we want to have this row here.

Otherwise, if we have enough space,

we wanna render a different row.

And in this different row here,

we don't wanna have the dropdown button,

instead there, we just want to have the other buttons.

So we could grab this spacer, and then these buttons,

and move those here into this list.

So with that, if we force a restart,

this is how this modal could look like

if we are in landscape mode.

If I go back to portrait mode, we got the old layout.

And that is how you can create a dynamic layout

with help of LayoutBuilder.

Though as mentioned before, in this scenario,

where this new expense widget effectively does take up

the entire screen anyways,

we could have also simply used MediaQuery

as we did in the expenses widget.

But I also wanted to introduce you to LayoutBuilder,

which can be very useful if you have a widget

that should only care about its parent widget,

and not necessarily about the entire available screen size.

Of course, all as mentioned before,

here we have a lot of code duplication and copying,

and this can make this code here quite hard to understand

and read, since we have all that duplication.

For that reason, you might want

to actually outsource these different widgets,

which are reused in different parts of the layout,

into separate custom widgets.

Here, I'll just keep it like this,

but it is something to be aware of

and to potentially improve.

But with that, that is how you can use LayoutBuilder

to also build a layout dynamically.

Transcript
Now to come to an end for this section,

I also briefly wanna dive into

how you can build adaptive apps.

And for that of course it's important to understand

what this means.

In the end, it means that your UI

can also adapt to the platform

on which it's being presented.

And in general, you can use

exactly the same widgets and styling

no matter if you are running your app on Android or iOS.

But you can also adjust some widgets or styles

if you want to.

Now, to show you what I mean,

I am launching my app here on an iOS simulator,

which I started on my device.

Since I'm on macOS here, I can indeed build my Flutter app

for iOS on this device.

So that's what I'm currently doing here.

I started this app,

this same app on which we worked

throughout this and the last section on iOS.

And as you can see,

this app also looks totally fine on an iOS device.

And there are even some adjustments,

like for example, this tile here,

which is now centered,

which are made automatically by Flutter

as your app does run on a different device.

On Android, this title was on the left,

on iOS, it's automatically centered.

Though you could overwrite that if you wanted to

by going to your scaffold app bar

and setting center title to false, for example.

This would force the title to be on the left.

But it is of course also something you can keep

since these are nice touches

that make the app feel native

for the platform on which it is running.

You also might note that

the font is a different one

because by default here on iOS,

Flutter uses a different font family for the text.

But the general look and feel, of course, is the same.

And that's a good thing

because that is what allows you

to build your app once, to write your code once

and to use the same code and styling

for different target platforms.

But there also are some cases

where you might want to have a more platform specific look.

For example here, if I click save expense,

this dialogue, which I get here

is the exact same dialogue with the exact same look and feel

as I had it on Android.

And this might be fine,

it definitely does not look awful and it works.

But you might want to use the native iOS dialogue

look and feel here.

And to help you achieve this,

Flutter gives you many built-in widgets

that are styled and fine-tuned for iOS.

For example, here in case of the dialogue,

Flutter gives you an alternative show

Cupertino dialogue method.

Now if you want to use this method,

you have to add an import at the top though,

and you have to import cupertino.dart

from the Flutter framework package.

Now Cupertino is simply the name of the iOS styling language

or design language you could say.

So whenever you read Cupertino in a Flutter app,

it refers to iOS styles and behaviors.

So with cupertino.dart imported,

you could call show Cupertino dialogue

to have that Cupertino look and feel.

Now here for this builder,

you then have to pass a function that also takes a context

and that then returns a widget

just as before for the normal show dialogue function,

if you want to call it like this.

Now the widget you would want to return here

would be the CupertinoAlertDialogue.

So here for the normal show dialogue function,

I returned the normal alert dialogue,

which has the material styling.

Here for a showCupertinoDialogue,

I'm returning CupertinoAlertDialogue.

Now, thankfully here for the CupertinoAlertDialogue,

you can also set all these parameters,

which we did set here for the normal alert dialogue,

title, content and actions.

These are all supported here as well

and hence we can just copy and paste them here.

But with that, we have a dialogue

that looks like the iOS dialogue.

But of course, we'll have one problem

we can't show both here,

or at least we probably don't want to show both.

So we need some way of finding out

on which platform we're running

to then show the appropriate dialogue.

So how can we find out on which platform we're running?

Well, for this, we can use an if statement

here nested inside of the outer if statement,

though you could also refactor the code

to be in a separate method

and that is indeed what I'll do here.

I'll add a new void method showDialogue,

and in here, I want to show either the Cupertino

or the normal dialogue.

So I'll cut that code from submit expense data

and paste that in here into show dialogue.

And in submit expense data before returning here,

I'll call showDialogue.

And this is totally optional,

I'm just doing this to keep this method lean and readable.

But now in showDialogue,

we wanna find out on which platform we're running.

And as mentioned, this can be achieved

by using if statement.

And then by using the platform class here,

which is provided by Dart,

which has helpful properties like is Android or is iOS.

And here we can check if the platform is iOS.

And for that, an import must be added at the top

where you import dart:io

because that's the Dart package

that provides this platform class.

And with that import added,

we can use this platform class here

and then check if we are on the iOS platform,

in which case, we wanna show the Cupertino dialogue.

So I'll move this code here into this if statement

and else I wanna show the regular dialogue

which I show on Android, therefore.

And with that we have a convenient way

of finding out on which platform we are running

and we can then use this information

to adjust the widgets we're rendering

or like in this case, to adjust the dialogue we're showing.

So here, if a force a reload,

open this and click save expense,

now I have that iOS look.

And that's how you can build adaptive apps

by using this platform class

to determine on which platform you are.

And then you can use that information

to run different code for different platforms.

And, of course, here we're calling

different showDialogue methods.

We could also use this platform information

here in the build method

to return different widgets or different widget combinations

based on the platform.

All these things are possible.

Transcript
And that's it for this course section.

In this section,

you learned how you can build responsive user interfaces

by using MediaQuery to get the width or height of the screen

on which the UI is presented,

or by using LayoutBuilder

to get information about the constraints

applied by the parent widget of the widget

in which you're using Layout Builder.

And you can use

both the information you get from Media Query

or the information you get from Layout Builder

to then render your UI

or parts of the UI conditionally,

to, for example,

render a row instead of a column, or vice versa.

You also learned how you can dynamically add extra padding

to make sure that the keyboard

that might be opened up once the user taps into a text field

is respected and the content is pushed up appropriately,

and that you might also want to add scrollability

to make sure that all input fields are always reachable.

And you also learned about this SafeArea concept,

which makes sure that things like the device camera

don't overlap your UI.

And of course, last but not least, you also learned

how you can find out on which platform you're running

so that you then can execute different code

or show different widgets

based on that platform information.